Taking creatine can increase muscle and
strength, but also improve brain health
and performance in sleepdeprived and
high stress states. But there's some new
research coming out showing its ability
to slow prevent things like
Wow. Jeff Cavalier is the physical
therapist and strength coach trusted by
the NFL, MLB, WWE, and even Sylvester
Stallone. He's built a global reputation
for science-based training that
delivers. What do people want? When we
pull our followers, I found that for
men, they want their six-pack abs,
getting bigger arms, develop their
chest, and for women, they want to have
better legs and well-developed back
sizes. So, we'll get into those
exercises. But the biggest problem most
people have is the struggle to get
started. And in doing so, become
paralyzed by inactivity and say, "I'm
not going to do anything at all." And I
get emotional, but it's sad when people
don't ever find that drive and and
motivation cuz like the detrimental
effects that prolonged sitting can have
on your body, they call it the new
smoking. Like if I take away your
health, you're done. So finding the
drive to get yourself on track with
pursuing optimal health is everything.
So if I was one of those people
struggling to get the ball rolling,
where would you start with me? I would
start with and I'm not done yet. Lower
belly fat. How do I get rid of that?
Calories and calories out. What's your
view? You say that there are five key
exercises to maximize your longevity and
quality of life. Can you show me these
workouts? Sure. And then why did you
bring the skeleton with you with the bow
tie? This is Raymond and I use him to
show one of the most fascinating areas
of training that has yet to be
uncovered.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribe to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
[Music]
much. Jeff, you're very much known as
the the king and the OG of online
fitness training, advice, support.
In terms of the mission that you're on
in particular and how your perspective
differs from other people out there in
the market, what is it that you think
makes your perspective different,
unique, and more important potentially
than a lot of the perspectives out there
as it relates to how to how to how to
build up our muscles, how to have a
strong, healthy body, and how to prolong
our health span.
Everybody that for the most part that's
out there trying to put information
out, they should have a level there's a
level of respect I have for everyone
doing that because they're all trying to
help people get better or improve
themselves. I think where I was really
heavily focused was on a more
comprehensive more uh multiaceted way to
do that because my background wasn't
just in let's say strength training or
in aesthetic appeal of of training but
also as a physical therapist and having
a physical therapy background I
understood the importance of not
sacrificing the body in the process of
trying to aesthetically improve the
body. So I believe that when people
understand the why and they do become
empowered to sort of you know make this
their own journey the benefits are so
far reaching it's it's not just the gym
or the aesthetic appeal that you imp
improve it's your it's so many facets of
life that improve because fitness
improves like mental health is directly
related to people's physical health. If
you feel if you look better and feel
better about yourself, your mental
health improves, too. Like every element
of life is improved, I think, with
improved levels of fitness and health.
So, my why has always been to just use
my platform to try to get people to
understand that even the smallest
investments, it doesn't have to be every
bit I do. And I try to stress that in
all my videos, especially when we start
to talk about nutrition, like you don't
have to eat the way I do to get as lean
as I am to still benefit from being
lean. You could be you could have body
fat levels much higher and still see the
immense benefits in terms of overall
health. So, you don't have to do it
exactly how I do it, but take the
information and apply it to yourself.
That to me is the most rewarding part of
it. Because if I can show you how to do
it, the whole thing, teach a man to
fish, right? If I could do that, then I
think I've done something right. I say
all the time, I could take everything
away from you. I could take all your
money, I could take houses, I could take
everything away. I could take even, you
know, relationships away because we
could always find another relationship
potentially. If I take away your health,
you're done.
Health is everything. And what did you
study? So a few things. Physio
neurobbiology was my initial degree and
um I became a physical therapist which
required another three years. And you
became a certified strength and
conditioning specialist as well. Most of
the jobs that were in professional
sports would require some certification
in that regard. So you'd have to have a
college degree, but then you'd also have
to have um um a certification. And in
this case, it was the National Strength
and Conditioning Association. And over
the last 25 years since you got that
certification, who have you worked with?
Who have you helped? And how many
people? The most important thing that
came from that certification was that it
qualified me to work for the Mets. And
what's the Mets for anyone that doesn't?
So the Mets are the New York Mets
professional baseball team. So I work
with some of the best baseball players
in the world. Had a chance to work with
some of the greatest football players in
the world. Like it's wrestlers. was a
big wrestling fan growing up and we have
a lot of wrestlers that that come
through and that's a cool thing because
wrestling though some people may not
like the storyboarding of wrestling
athletically they're some of the most
gifted athletes in the world. I mean,
the travel schedule, the amount of days
that they that they that they wrestle
every week, the the rigors that they put
their body through, whatever you want to
say, the outcome might be determined,
but the the the the bumps and bruises
are not fake. And, you know, they also
have to have that aesthetic appeal, too.
So, it's this combination of athletic
and aesthetic that always appealed to
me. When I look at someone like you and
I see these bulging muscles and I see
how lean you are, I it's very easy to
fall into the trap of thinking, well,
you were just born with extreme
motivation and that's why you are the
way that you are.
Well, I think motivation is extremely
overrated, right? Because like
motivation isn't what produces the
results. It might get you to the to the
show and get you to actually show up at
the gym and initiate the work, but only
discipline keeps you there. And being
disciplined is the number one asset
somebody can have. Now discipline comes
with finding success. So at an early age
if you can or an early training age if
you can experience some success early
you do become motivated again
self-motivated
um to continue on down that path. So my
genetics were never great. I I didn't if
my mom was 5 foot tall my my dad's 5
foot n 5'8 160 pounds not a lot of
muscle. I definitely have surpassed my
dad in muscle, but like I didn't come
from this genetically gifted pool of
cavaliers. There's no there's no way.
But I did have this desire to do
something in terms of training and
taking my body as far as I could. But I
really found the discipline
through the fact that I liked it and I
found that this was feeding me in other
ways. It was it was making me feel
fulfilled. So it was easier for me to
stick to it. you you must deal with so
many people that are struggling that
come to you and they say, "Listen, I've
got these big goals. I'm I'm overweight.
I don't feel good. I've got diabetes
here, cardiovascular problem here,
inflammation here." And they say to you
that they want to change. Yeah. You
know, you can see it in their face.
They're desperate, but they don't change
for whatever reason. We live in an age
now where you have access to the
internet. You have so much access to
information. use it in whatever way you
can to get started on your journey
because the earlier you start the
better. But it's it's it is quite sad
when people don't ever find that spark.
And trying to play catch-up, it's no lie
to it. You're not it's going to be
harder as you get older. Starting or
initiating a training program in your
40s and 50s, though way better than not
starting one, is much more difficult
than if you had started in your teens
and 20s. you know to develop that habit
to maintain that habit it's very
difficult to initiate that the older
that you get but I do think that it's
possible so my best advice to people who
have that struggle to get
started is to figure out ways that you
can eliminate thinking right because the
longer you think the more likely you are
to not be able to do it you know the
thing that stops most people there's
that saying the start is what stops most
people right but at the same token, it's
not the obstacle that's in your way.
It's the fact that the path of least
resistance is more inviting. So, you
wind up saying, "Well, I you know, I
could just sit on the couch and watch
this. I'm not going to go to the gym."
And believe me, there's even nights now
for me where I'll be with one of my sons
and we'll be in his room putting him to
bed. I might fall asleep in there, you
know, and wake up and it's late at
night. I don't even think I let my dogs
out. I go right outside. I walk.
Sometimes I'm literally half asleep as
I'm walking, but I know if I can get to
the gym, get in there, turn on the the
music, and kind of put the lights on,
and do one warm-up set, I'll I'll be
good. And if I even sat down for a
second, I might find that path of least
resistance to be a lot more inviting and
that couch to be a lot more comfortable.
And then once it becomes something that
you enjoy, because for the most part, I
think you probably enjoy it now, right?
The process, it becomes a lot easier to
make that automatic step. But there's
still going to be days, you know, maybe
a long day of shooting, you know, and
you're going to be like, h, not maybe
not today. But if you stop the
negotiation with yourself and you just
go and make that first action, that's
all it usually takes to get you through
the door and you realize that you know
what you're what you were set out to do.
When you think about all the many
millions of people that have watched
your videos, I mean, it's actually
billions of people that have watched
your videos and consumed your content,
you must hear a lot of different types
of spark. When I say spark, I mean the
moment in someone's life where they
something happened and it stuck. It
finally stuck. What are the kind of
things that you hear? Oh man, they're
life-changing. Like that it it is it's
part of the why that keeps me going, you
know, hearing some of these stories. I
had a live event a few years ago, first
woman that we ever had. So, I was I was
a rookie. I didn't know how it was going
to go, but part of that event was a
competition that we ran. So anyway, we
we had a guy who was in his uh late 50s,
first one to do the competition. So he
he drew number one. Okay. So he goes and
the first thing we had was a 300 yard
shuttle, which is just a 50 yard
distance. They had to run to the cone
and back. That's 100 yards back and
forth again and back and forth again. It
was extremely hot that day. It was like
95 degrees because of course I ran the
event in July and it was like, "Okay,
this is not going to work out so well."
So anyway, he goes out, he comes back on
the last run. He uh he starts to
windmill his arms. He's he's losing his
balance forward. And I'm like, "Oh no."
And he crashes down, wipes out, scrapes
up his knee, blood all over the place.
Okay, next kid comes up. He He's up now.
He goes by the second station, he's
overheated. He tried so hard. He has to
stand out the rest of the competition
because he overheated from I was ready
to to put a stop to the games because I
said, "We just weren't prepared for this
heat in this first time." And anyway, we
continued. So, the fourth drill up for
the man that I talked about in the
beginning was a sled push. And we had
put 225 lbs on the sled, but that sled
was on the pavement out in the parking
lot from this gym that we that we hosted
it at. And the friction of the of the
sled on the ground was not really
something that was accounted for. It
made it even more difficult. Well,
again, he's got that bloodied up knee.
He's he's pushing it. He gets it to the
end struggling. And now he has to pick
up at the end 100 pound kettle bell and
walk it back. He goes down there. He
grabs a kettle bell after a long, you
know, multiple attempt to get the sled
down there. And I finally run down there
and I said, uh, his name is Craig. I
said, "Craig, dude, you don't have to do
this. You're good. You're good. It's
okay." And he's like, "No." And he says,
"I'm gonna do it." And he starts walking
and he's crossing the legs over each
other. It looks like he's gonna go down
again. I put my arm around him. I said,
"Man, listen. you don't have to do this.
He says, and I get goosebumps from
think. He goes, Jeff, I have to do this.
He goes, I was diagnosed with MS, you
know, four years ago, and I can't feel
my feet. I got to do this.
And it's that kind of drive and and
motivation. And you never know because
you don't know who the what they're
dealing with, you know? And I get
emotional, but it's it's like that's the
kind of stuff that gets me going. We had
another guy who uh competed at our event
and he was doing uh the push-up portion
of the competition. It's the second year
and he was doing his push-ups. He wasn't
going all the way down. So got down to
like I don't know two three inches away
from his chest. So I go over to him. I'm
like um hey dude just a little bit
lower. Get your chest down. He says, "I
can't because I have a port in my chest
and I have stage four cancer and I can't
get all the way down because of the
port." He wound up dying two months
after the
competition. So, when you realize that
people do this for reasons that you
don't like, it's not just to go to the
gym to get a six-pack. It's it's going
there to for reasons we'll never know.
And I think that those those kinds of um
moments are more than touching to me as
you can tell. But like they're they're
they're just they show the power of will
and that is something that we'll never
be able to quantify
within that as well. I was thinking
about how that guy who wouldn't put that
100 pound kettle bell down for him.
It it was actually about a
story he wanted to tell to himself. It's
something that he wanted to do for
reasons that are much more about one's
identity and one's self-story as we call
it. And uh on that particular point,
it's one of the things that I often
think about with fitness and working out
is if I can be the guy that grabs the
keys that day when I don't feel like it,
then how that permeates through the rest
of my life and how I show up in the rest
of my life when there's things I don't
want to do and how that then shapes me
over time into somebody who is able to
have the difficult conversation, is able
to confront the thing, I think is like
really understated. I actually was
reading this um I think Andrew Hubman
told me this. He said that they've
neuroscience has found a part of the
brain which is associated with doing
hard things. Yes, I saw that. And I
think he said basically that that part
of the the brain and I'll put this up on
the screen grows the more hard things
that you do. So you basically build the
muscle of being able to do hard things.
And the minute I learned that, I oh,
this makes a lot of sense because the
more I was able to make the workout
stick and the health and fitness stick
and now my diet is like as we sit here
now is extremely disciplined. I've like
changed as a person in other areas of my
life. Like I've got more organized with
like my my possessions and well, you
realize what you're capable of too,
right? Because I think we underell our
capabilities. And I think that in
reference to those two men that I just
talked about, like when you're staring
at the face of something that seems to
be much more dire than again what level
of fitness you have, you realize that
there's a much deeper well that you can
tap into to do things that you don't
want to do. Yeah. And I think the people
that are lucky enough like yourself to
have found that have found the keys to
the kingdom to be able to you know take
themselves to another level of awareness
and self-awareness that does 100% like
you said play out in other areas of your
life. you know, when you can do the
difficult
thing, it's still not an automatic that
you're gonna be able to have that
difficult conversation with somebody,
you know, but you know that you have the
capacity to do things that you didn't
really think you could and it gives you
that confidence to actually go and carry
those out. Interesting thing on that
that uh study that uh Andrew Hubin was
talking about was that if you start to
like the thing that you actually didn't
like in the beginning, then it no longer
challenges that area of the brain. that
area of the brain starts to shrink
again. Oh, really? So, it it has to kind
of which is cool because it means that
you need to continue to seek challenge.
I was thinking a lot about this over
Christmas and New Year's. I was I sat
down with one of my best friends and
said to him, I said, "What exercise and
what thing do you dislike the most and
we basically made a list of them and
then we started doing those things. For
me, it was actually running and it was
leg day and squatting." Yeah, it also
made me cuz when I asked him why he
didn't do those things, the list of
reasons he gave were things like my legs
aren't insert excuse, my brain insert
excuse. And we both came to realize
together that that was just a bunch of
that we like made our
identities and it was now limiting us.
Are there things like that in your life
that you just Oh gosh, you avoid
conditioning, running, I try to address
those things and do them knowing that I
should do more of them, but there's
always more more to do. One of the
things you must have figured out from
all the content you've produced across
all the these channels is really like
the essence of what people want and and
I you know because you'll see from the
views and the engagement and these
things you'll build this sort of mental
pattern of oh okay people are really
interested in this. So if you had to
summarize for me the essence of what you
think people are looking for and when I
say the essence I mean like the why why
why the very bottom of that what are
those things? Oh, I think I think
insecurity is definitely a factor. I
think um a feeling of wanting to be
accepted is is part of that. I think a
feeling of wanting to be more capable,
right? Because I think a lot a lot of
men carry insecurities of how capable
they are. You know, if the moment arose
that they needed to, let's say, protect
their family or do something that was
physically needed to be done, how
capable would you actually be? And I
think a lot of us feel insecure in our
preparedness that way. So I think that's
a driver. Um I heard this quote many
years ago. It says change happens when
the pain of staying the same becomes
greater than the pain of making a
change. And I was thinking if you were
my trainer and I was one of those
stubborn people who were struggling to
get the ball rolling. Where would you
start with me? Like what would you do if
I was super stubborn? I tried for three
years. I'd never made it stick. But but
clearly there was health consequences
playing out in my body. Where would you
start with me to get me going? Probably
the conversation, you know, I I would
start with always with the conversation.
I think it is important to see if you
can understand the why for somebody
because if you if you ask this question,
this is an interesting exercise to do,
but if you ask the question of like why
do you want to get in shape? Um you
might say I'm too fat right now. And I
would say to you, well, what would it
mean to you to not be as fat as you
think you are? Well, I it would be
better because I'd have a six-pack. What
would be important if having a six-pack?
Well, I would like how I looked in the
mirror more. Why would it be important
for you to like who you're looking at in
the mirror? Because I don't feel like
I'm enough right now because I'm letting
myself down because I know that I'm not
doing the things I need to. Why is it
important to not let yourself down?
Right? So when you start to ask the
question multiple keep digging you find
the why very quickly and a lot of times
it comes from pain from childhood. It
comes from pain of of letting others
down. It comes from a feeling of
inadequacy that you developed either
because it was you know drilled into you
from your parents or or others or
because you just never lacked the
self-confidence to actually feel better
about yourself. I always say that most
people who are lifelong gymgoers, they
all have some level of pain in their
life that caused them to seek this out
because it's the one thing they can
control. It's the one area where it's
like I can I don't have to listen to
anybody. I have to do what I have to do
for myself and I'm in control of my
body. And I think that a lot of times
people or or it's an escape, you know,
where you benefit from the endorphins
that are released through exercise and
it's your escape for doing something to
make yourself feel better. But that a
lot of times people get into fitness as
an escape from some of that pain. So if
if if I had you had come to me in the
very beginning, I would have started
with that conversation and tried to find
out why is it that you can't stick with
this? You've tried and you stopped. And
I think that people need to understand
that. And finding the why to get
yourself on track with pursuing optimal
health is everything. What about the
very top then? Like how does it manifest
like the the title of the video or the
thing? I mean the top is uh abs, biceps,
chest and uh and you know low back pain.
I mean people actually come to me for
one of two things. Again I think it's
having the two the two hats of physical
therapist and uh strength and
conditioning coach. I think people come
to me to fix something or to improve the
look of something. So we have lots and
lots and lots of views obviously based
around fixing issues um low back pain,
postural issues, knee pain, shoulder
pain and how it disrupts their ability
to carry on in life or through their
fitness pursuits. Then there's the other
side of it where people of course they
want their six-pack abs and then they
want their arms and they want their
chest. And I I highlight those because
the fact is that is where people are
most interested because it's, you know,
it's it's the it's the beach muscles.
But that's it's a fact of life. People
want to improve those areas. What I try
to do when I when I bring people in
through that track is to also make them
aware that it's okay, this is cool. You
want your abs, that's good, you know,
but obviously it's going to require a
healthier eating plan. So I know I can
have a much broader impact on their
overall health and life if I can get
them to eat much healthier than they are
right now. So I always feel that you can
come in for whatever your top level
interest might be. But my mission and
goal is to make sure that you understand
there's more to it than that. I've kind
of broken everything you've said into
three sections which is people want to
look good, they want to perform in
whatever that might be and they also
want to be able to do it for a long
time. They want to live long. Yeah. So
under if we start with looking good as a
topline category, what are the things
that you think are the subcategories of
looking good? The amount of fat that
someone carries. So how lean they are.
Yeah. The aesthetic development of their
muscles. what their bodies are shaped
like because, you know, you could lose
weight, but as you've described before,
skinny fat isn't really an attractive
look. Um, so I think they want to
develop their muscles in specific ways.
What is it the difference you see
between what men say they want versus
what women say they want? What do men
come to you and say that they want to,
you know, as a a trainer of athletes,
it's it's sacrilegious to me, but they
really discuss anything in the lower
body, right? They're not talking about,
I just want really big legs or I want to
have, you know, strong developed glutes.
I mean, it's just not really high on the
list. So, pretty much everything is
going to focus on, you know, from the
waist up in terms of the aesthetic
desire, bigger neck for men. For women,
it's the opposite, right? For women,
they focus first and foremost below the
waist. They want to have better legs.
They want to have stronger legs. They
want to have well-developed backsides.
They want to like, and there's probably,
I mean, a cultural importance upon that.
You know, people are, you know, men are
being judged aesthetically on their
upper bodies more than women are, and
women are being judged more
aesthetically on their lower bodies. So,
we're we're feeding into those desires,
especially, you know, one scroll through
Instagram and you're just reinforcing
everything I just talked about in that
category as well of looking good. Um,
nutrition. Most importantly, the level
of body fat that you carry is going to
be impacted by nutrition. So, let's
start with fat and lean. Mhm. If I want
to be lean like you and I want to have
low body fat,
where does one begin?
What happened with me and what I always
advise people to do is start just by
looking at globally from 30,000 foot
view. What do you know you're doing in
like not well right now? Like are you
drinking excessively? Um do you end
every night with you know a pint of ice
cream? like you know you're doing some
things wrong. So you make one pass at
the obvious stuff and you just do it for
a couple weeks, you know, and you see
how you progress and what will normally
happen is usually those are the most
offending the biggest offenders when it
comes to nutrition that you will notice
some quick weight loss when you stop it.
What do you think are some of the
offenders that we don't realize are
offenders? I've had so many in my life
even like ketchup and Yeah. I thought
white rice was great. Yeah, I mean,
white rice is actually there's a place
for carbohydrates in people's in
people's diets, I believe, but um you
have to have a healthy respect for them
because they're the most likely to be
overeaten. Like the desire to eat five
steaks is not there for most of us. Like
you but you could pound a whole plate
full of rice and then some or pasta and
then some because they're they're they
are much more chemically pleasing to the
body. So, I think people need to uh be c
cautious of overconumption of
carbohydrates and they're not aware of
portion sizes really impacting them
because they'll say, "No, I had I had
rice and uh and and pasta and and I
would say I have rice and pasta too
every day, but like I probably don't eat
as much as that person does." So,
portion sizes when it comes to that is
one of the areas people do not have a
good awareness about. the kind of hidden
offenders. I mean, there's sugar in a
lot of things that is used just to make
these things more appealing, especially,
you know, like yogurts, right? People
will have, you know, fruit on the bottom
yogurt, but it's like loaded with sugar
or I my first experience was oatmeal. I
was reading the bodybuilding magazines
in my teens that every bodybuilder ate
oatmeal in the morning. So, of course, I
was buying Quaker Oats, but I was buying
those little packets and they have brown
sugar in the bottom and it's like they
were loaded with sugar. They were not
the equivalent of Quaker Oats from a
from a like a a
canister. And so here I'm thinking I'm
doing something right, but I'm not
because there was more sugar in that
than there was in a in a a bag of or in
a a bowl of tricks cereal. What do you
look for in the on the package? I always
look for sugar and fat. That's what I
look for. So B dietary fat there are
nine calories per gram of fat versus
four calories per gram of protein or
carbohydrate. There are much more
calorie dense foods. So when you have
fats on your plate in any way, shape or
form calorically the that dish is going
to increase pretty quickly. So you have
to be mindful of them. If you if you
want to lose weight and achieve a
hypocchloric state to get there, you're
going to have to take in fewer calories
than you're than you're than you're
burning. That's why I would look at fat
content. But sugar is just really not
necessary. It's just one of those things
that our bodies do not need and um tends
to be uh too inviting to the point where
people have a hard time stopping eating
sugar. So, I think that's one of the
fastest ways to um to get yourself on
track is to is to try to minimize the
sugar content in the food. And then I
look for protein because I think that
protein has a lot of benefits in terms
of improving that ratio of fat to lean
muscle and also for its ability to
satiate you. So, if you're eating a
higher protein food, you're likely going
to find yourself feeling satisfied and
full faster than if it's just a
carbohydratebased meal. So, those are
the three things that I look at every
time I turn a label around. Protein,
sugar, and fats. And what does your diet
look like? I eat uh breakfast in the
morning. And I have usually, again, I'll
give you typical meals. I have uh
oatmeal. I even put like some pumpkin in
the oatmeal itself, some canned pumpkin
just for some additional uh vi vitamins
and minerals, protein shake, um and some
maybe some egg whites. So, I get good
amounts of protein. And for lunch, I'll
have like a grilled chicken wrap. Again,
trying to prioritize protein at every
single meal. And I'll try to have a
Greek yogurt that has limited sugar in
it. Um, then I'll have a protein shake
usually after work only because I know
that when I get done with work, usually
at 6:00, I come home, the kids are
there, they want to play. I wind up just
having something to tie me over,
realizing that my dinner's going to
occur later at night after my workout.
What happens though is that workout
occurs at around 10:30 to 11 o'clock at
night. So dinner happens at around
midnight for me. Um that's always again
based around a protein first. So usually
chicken or steak or fish and then
fibrous carbohydrates. So it's going to
be something like uh I I I like
edetamame. It's um you know it has good
protein uh in it and I'm not fearful of
the soy protein that's there especially
in that limited amount. broccoli and
then I have my f my starchy
carbohydrates which my favorite of all
time is uh sweet potatoes. So I'll have
sweet potatoes or or pasta or both. I'm
still shocked that you're eating dinner
at midnight and that what So what time
do you train? So I train around 10:30 or
11 until around4 to 12 or so. Is that
suboptimal?
It's it's only optimal because it's when
I can consistently do it. Okay. If I
could change that, I would probably work
out at 5:00 p. p.m., you know, but I
always find that there's still work
going on. People still need me at that
point in the day. Why not the morning? I
have a very difficult time waking up.
I'm one of those people that act like a
zombie for probably uh 15 minutes before
I'm feeling ready to go. I'm very much
the same. I probably eat a bit too late.
I train a bit too late, etc. And as I'm
listening to you, I'm almost listening
to myself. And I know the rebuttal is
that, well, Stephen, if you went to bed
earlier and you ate earlier, then you'd
wake up and you'd be able to train in
the morning. Yeah. Well, how do you feel
when you wake up? Do you feel energetic
as soon as you wake up? Or do you feel
No. Yeah. Um, I'm very similar to you. I
wake up late. Yeah. And if I wake up
late, then I feel fine. But if you try
and wake me up at 7:00, the chances are
that I went to bed maybe at midnight or
1:00 a.m. So, there's not enough sleep
taking place there. But having worn this
whoop for a while, who are a sponsor,
I'm an investor in the company, hashtag
ad hasha. Um, one of the things I came
to learn was that when I eat close to
the time I go to sleep, my body isn't
actually asleep cuz I could see my
resting heart rate so high through the
night. So, my body's actually just
working on the the food, so it's not
restoring my body. So, what are my goals
for this year is to try and not eat
after 9:00 p.m.
I I think it's a good goal in terms of
establishing a more regular sleep or or
or time to go to bed because the number
one thing I think people need to
understand is that when it comes to
sleep, the the routine of sleep is
what's most important. I believe even in
cases of lower sleep totals um there's
actually 27% of people report sleeping
uh less than six hours a night and 20%
of people sleep four to five hours. I
actually fall into the category of
sleeping probably 5 to 6 hours uh most
nights because I get to bed late and I
get up around 7 o'clock each each
morning. Do you sleep track? Uh I don't
sleep track. I did for a while. Um, I
don't sleep track. I actually, you know,
I've tracked my cortisol levels and my
levels of cortisol have actually
improved even as my sleep time, my total
sleep time has diminished. Now, there
is, and I hold on to this um as a
possibility, but I haven't tested
myself. There are two genes that are
actually responsible for uh short
sleeper syndrome. In other words, where
you can get away with less sleep because
it it optimizes gene expression for
wakefulness and brain stem activity that
allows you to wake up easier. And the
downside to that is that only 1 to 3% of
the population has that. So unless I got
really lucky in terms of that, then I
might be, you know, playing a game that
I ultimately can't win. Um, but I think
that there is a possibility that some
people can operate better on lower sleep
totals than others. On this point of
being uh
lean, one of the things people are most
obsessed with getting rid of
is lower belly fat. This stubborn belly
fat that occurs right right there. Right
there on our little mannequin here. You
don't have a pouch. That's what we call
it. Me and my friends, we call it a
pouch. um we can be, you know, very lean
elsewhere but still have a little bit of
a pouch there. Some people think doing
sit-ups is the way to get rid of that
stubborn belly fat. What is the answer
in your view? It's the level of
strictness of nutrition. And when I mean
the level of strictness, it's not just
in the foods that you choose, but
the consistency with which you choose
them. So, how long can you sustain this
really clean diet? And I hate the word
clean diet because usually when people
say they eat clean, it's actually the
first thing is a red flag that they
don't. Um, but I think it comes from
having a sustained ability to eat in a
very restricted way. When men put on
body fat, that is the first place to go
on and the last place to come off. And
one of the biggest areas for that, you
mentioned that I don't have one, but I
mean, as as ridiculous as that's this is
going to sound, when I start to see a
little bit of fat on my body, it's right
there. And it's because that is the
absolute first place to go on. This the
shamefulness of of how your body does
this. And what it does to us is that it
kind of works from this top down
approach. Like you lose fat first from
here and then it kind of goes down and
the last place is here. So it works in
this top down approach. Well, by the
time you get all the way down there,
you've lost the fat in your face. You've
lost the fat in your neck. So, like, you
know, I I sometimes I look at myself in
the mirror, I'm like, man, you're gone,
you know? And I hate the way that like
my my face gets sort of caved in. But
it's sometimes the price that you pay in
terms of maintaining a lean physique.
Um, especially naturally because that's
how your body starts to lose fat and
especially as you age, you start to lose
collagen and skin thickness. So, it
looks even it's even more of a
challenge. But this top down approach is
sometimes good because it allows you to
start to see like the upper row abs
underneath the chest or so when you
start to get into better shape. You
might have noticed this yourself. You
start to see like okay my my lower chest
isn't as saggy anymore. It's actually
starting to take some shape. Well,
what's cool is that's actually that
little spark of motivation that like I
want to keep going. I can see the top
ab, right? I can see the top ab like
there it is. I can see I have them, you
know? I actually have them. You I got a
two pack, but I have them. Well, you
continue down that path. Sometimes you
sharpen up the diet a little bit more.
Sometimes you take one extra night of,
you know, uh, socializing or drinking
out of the schedule and you start to see
it, you know, go even lower and you
start to get that second row of abs,
then it becomes a question of how
motivated you are to actually discontin
what level of sacrifice is required or
is worth it to you to continue. And
that's the caveat that I always say I
mentioned early on like is it that
important to you? Because I could tell
you that at 10 11 12% body fat, you're
going to look amazing and you're going
to look better than 98% of all men. So
whether you have that little tiny, you
know, area of fat around your waist,
you're still going to have your abs.
You're still going to have defined
shoulders and arms and, you know, some
veins popping out and other places. like
is that is that good enough so that you
experience the health benefits you
already would be you you be there
aesthetically you're probably really
happy with where you are now compared to
where you came from and you still get to
live a life that's not as filled with
sacrifice yeah to get there and that's
the battle people have to have to um
wage and ask themselves what is how
worth it is it to me is is the game of
weight loss basically calories in
calories out I I just need to have less
calories than I burn. Yes and no. So, to
lose weight, you're going to need to be
in a calorie deficit. Um, but if you
took that approach and just ate whatever
you wanted to, let's just say you ate
Twinkies in a deficit, you're not going
to get the same outcome because the type
of weight lost is going to vary
depending upon what you ingest. So, if
you don't ingest enough protein, you're
just eating Twinkies. might lose weight,
but you're also going to lose muscle in
the in the in the process. So, if you
want
to deter the loss of muscle and and
maximize the retention of muscle and
maybe again even slightly build in that
deficit, then you're going to want to
prioritize protein. So, it's not just
the calories in, calories out that will
get you to lose the weight. But when you
ultimat loss, they really want to make
sure that they're maximizing lean muscle
at the same time that they're losing
weight. if they want to look a certain
way, function a certain way, it's it it
it's gonna matter. What are the big
misconceptions we have about abs to get
rid of the body fat by doing those
crunches and stuff like that doesn't
work, you know? Um I think that's
probably the biggest misconception. I
always remember Llo. Lazlo was a was a
guy who worked on my house as a
contractor when we were building it. He
would come up to me just he was like the
typical male, right? He was in pretty
decent shape. He worked every day,
active. He's like, "I gotta get in
shape, man." And I was like, "Well, you
know, how many days a week do you
train?" He said, "Well, I don't really
train. I just, you know, do a couple
push-ups and stuff." I said, "Well,
you're gonna have to probably train.
What do you do for your nutrition?" I
kind of eat what I want. And I was like,
"All right." But he wasn't really
overweight, you know, but it's the
typical. And I He goes, "Just tell me
what I could I just want to know what I
can do for this. What's a good exercise
I could do for this for for his belly
fat?" For the belly fat. It's just
pointing at his stomach. And it's like
there's still that belief that there's
just an exercise or two that you need to
do for that. That's not how that's not
how it is. Abs are not going to be
gotten through just the exercise. It's
always about nutrition. It's always
about nutrition determines body fat
levels above everything else. Now, when
you get lean enough, if you're not doing
any type of uh ab training, you'll
probably have less defined abs because
you won't have the development of that
muscle. There's nothing different about
the abdominals and the biceps or the
quads. There's still muscles that can be
developed. And because of the anatomy of
the abs, there's that line down the
middle and the packs, right? That's just
caused by a suturing down of something
called linear alba. It's just a
tendonous sheath. When you develop the
muscles themselves through either
crunches or resistance training, right?
Even weighted ab work is is helpful in
this case. The muscles are just growing
just like a bicep would grow. And as
they grow that you can't change the
suturing down of the tendonous sheath.
So they're sort of growing out more
prominently from that area. So you get
more visible abs. But that's the only
way to really do that is through
training to hypertrophy the abs. But
you're not going to get there if you
don't first attack the body fat that's
over them. And that's only going to come
from nutrition. You know, sometimes you
see um older bodybuilders, like former
bodybuilders, and they kind of look a
bit bloated. What is that? I mean,
that's usually anabolic steroid use that
causes that or growth hormone. Um, that
doesn't generally come from natural
occurrences where your where your belly
gets so bloated like that. I mean,
sometimes if you have um different types
of hernas, you can get hernas actually
within the abdomen, not just in the
ingral um, you know, in the groin area.
That could cause some of that distension
in the abs, but not that global bloating
that you get there. That's really
usually a tell a telltale sign of like
growth hormone use. Something that
they've that they've abused that causes
the
the organs underneath to actually grow
and cause distension pushing out of the
belly. That's the organs growing
underneath. Yeah. It's actually is a
pretty disturbing visual when you think
about it, but it's not a it's certainly
not a healthy thing to have. And uh you
know, there's always a lot of
repercussions to um going down that
path. you know, they might look short
term the way they want to look. And I
would argue that even in those
cases, you know, the the the the large
super large Mr. Olympia look, I don't
even know if that was ever aesthetically
appealing to me or even a lot of people,
but um it it definitely leaves behind a
lot of a lot of damage. And people do
that at a variety of different ages now.
I think even people that aren't training
to be bodybuilders, I can think of
several people that I'm aware of who
have started taking like TRT and growth
hormones pretty young. And I'm actually
seeing a little bit of that same body
shape. I don't even know what it is, but
yeah, I mean I think it look at TRT is
becoming such a
prevalent path for people. I don't like
that that's a prevalent path. I don't
want to come across as somebody who is
anti-TRT because I've been I've been
reminded of that and that on some of the
videos I've made about it that look
Jeeoff there's a lot of cases where
people have extremely bottomed out
testosterone levels and there's nothing
medically that can be done other than
replace the testosterone that's not
being made. I completely appreciate
that. But as you've noted, the rise in
interest in TRT is coming from a lot of
the documentation of people talking
about their use of it and and how, you
know, they it's it's physically changing
them and they're doing it at at a rate
like it's it's becoming option one. Like
what about maximizing your natural
potential first, you know,
before declaring yourself as low
testosterone even at levels like of 400
and 500 and then going and using
testosterone like you're going to be on
that for the rest of your life if you
pursue that path. You know, once you
decide to replace your body's own
natural testosterone level with
exogenous testosterone, you're going to
have to rely on that for the rest of
your life. Now, some people can get off
of that and then try to restore their
body's ability to produce testosterone,
but that's not a given. So, be prepared
that once you go down that path, that's
one you're going to have to be on for
the rest of your life. Have you ever
taken TRT? No. No. Would you ever?
If it's proven down the road that it's
something that could be beneficial and
safe, I want to say I want to I'm aching
to say 100% safe because that's what I
want. than maybe I would if I felt like
I was really suffering from, you know,
the the the loss or the change that my
body was going through. Cuz I don't want
to just let myself get old. I want to
try to do what I can, but up till now,
the journey for me has been completely
natural and to do it in a way that it
feels most rewarding because I haven't
had to do anything. So, I feel like I'm
most inspired by my ability to keep
going. And I'm I'm going to be 50 this
year. What about let's do living long
then. Um, when we think about longevity
and what it's going to take for me to be
live a long time but be strong into my
later
years, where what areas do I need to
focus on training and and staying strong
and where do I need to invest my energy
and time? So, this is where I think when
I say if you want to look like an
athlete, you got to train like an
athlete because like the hallmark of
their training is that it's multiaceted.
So, you can't just have one element
developed and be a great athlete. Even
if you look at someone as
one-dimensional, I'm not doing this
saying this to put them down, but
onedimensional as an arm wrestler,
right? They could have grip strength and
forearm strength and rotator cuff
strength, you know, to be able to
actually turn somebody over, but if they
have poor nutrition, poor sleep, poor
recovery, they're likely going to lose,
especially because your neurological
output and grip is directly correlated
to your ability to recover.
If you don't have more than one
element de developed, you're not going
to be your best. So when people are
looking, the general population is
looking to become healthier and feel
better, it's not going to be one thing.
First and foremost, I believe that
getting on a training plan that
prioritizes the building of muscle, so
hypertrophy and strength building is
going to be really important because we
are going to again like I talked about
before, you're going to naturally lose
strength every passing decade. You know,
up to 8 to 10% per decade as you as you
pass the age of 50. So, you need to make
sure that you are doing something to
save that off. You can dramatically slow
that down by engaging in strength
training and engaging in regular weight
training with the purpose of trying to
build muscle. But you you have to do
that. The brain ages. So
having challenges to your balance,
having challenges to your ability to
maintain muscle recruitment because
that's again neurologically your brain
your neurons start to fire at a slower
pace. You need to train these things.
reactivity, reaction, your reaction
skills, again, balance drills. These are
all little parts of things that people
can do. I always remember seeing this
old man. He was in a he had an obstacle
course he built. I don't know if you
ever saw this, but it was a video. He
was like 89 years old and he made this
obstacle course and he used to add every
week or so he'd add one more obstacle to
his course and he built it in his
backyard and it was like a balance beam
and then a net that he had to climb and
all these things. He used to run the
obstacle course once a day. Wow. And he
said that like he would try to find new
ways to challenge his body so that he
would keep his brain guessing as to
what's next. And again, whether or not
it he was he was uh finding this thing
to be something he didn't want to do,
maybe it was also feeding into his his
his uh increases because of he was doing
the things he hated to do. But the but
the idea was he maintained his fitness
by being completely multiaceted and by
incorporating some of these balance and
reaction type drills into his approach
because it is important. The fall risk
improve uh increases exponentially as
you get older. Um a lot of it has to do
with something we'll talk about um with
the thoracic spine and losing mobility
there, but like you need to factor those
types of things in. Flexibility and
mobility feed into that. Like you can't
I always talk about there's a there's a
pyramid, right? If you look at the the
the old nutrition pyramid, there's a
bottom which is supposed to be represent
the the like all the things you're
supposed to work on and then it kind of
fine-tunes and works its way up. At the
bottom of the pyramid, most would say is
strength, right? You got to you got to
maintain your strength. And then above
that, you got to maintain your your
muscle mass, like the amount of lean
muscle you carry. And above that, your
ability to perform because of those two
attributes. So to be able to actually do
things and if it was an athlete it would
be like their skill work would be at the
very very top. So could you if you're a
baseball player you know how well do you
swing the bat? You know how well do you
feel the ground ball? Like it's that top
level skill work that comes up here. Is
cardiovascular in there? Cardiovascular
is in there as well as well. Yeah. Your
your conditioning would be right you
know depending upon who you talk to in
terms of longevity and performance and
the sport you play is going to fall
right above or below strength.
Now, I would argue that there's a few
things underneath the whole thing. It's
just like a tree. You see the tree above
the ground, but you don't see the roots.
And this in the pyramid sits on the
ground, but what's underneath the
pyramid? The roots, your stability, your
flexibility, your mobility. Because if I
took the strongest person that could
squat 600 lb, but now I'm going to put
you on a stability ball and tell you to
do the same thing. You're not doing it.
I just took away your amazing strength
because I took away your stability. And
if you can't obtain certain positions of
your body because you lack the mobility
or you lack the flexibility, then I've
also taken away and I've weakened the
strength that you have. It's there. Your
strength is there, but it can't be
expressed because I took away the
stability. So, the real root of
longevity in fitness is really in your
ability to maintain mobility,
flexibility, and stability. Flexibility
is the muscle length and in the in the
ability to change the length of the
muscle. Mobility is the joint
excursions, the ability to move your
joints and in and um their full range of
motion. So, it's it's a muscle or joint
thing. Still the same concept, but
they're working on different elements.
Do you think people realize that that's
so important? And do you think they
enjoy it? No, I think people hate it.
And I think that I mean some people like
it. If you're into the practice of yoga,
Pilates, you you will likely gain a
quick appreciation for how much better
you feel when you do those types of uh
exercises that will improve mobility and
flexibility. But for the average gym
goer, no, it's either going to get
relegated to the last thing they do uh
before they leave the gym or not at all.
And I think that that's going to have a
big impact on how well they feel. I
think that when they talk about the
fountain of youth, stretching and
mobility is probably the thing that
makes people feel the best. I've heard
that people say that and I agree to
almost a full extent, but I think that
if you are just limber and loose, but
you lack the the strength, you are never
going to be as functionally capable as
you can. Actually, I I have this band to
sort of show that like if somebody was
just completely flexible, right, and you
were trying to shoot this band across
the table, I don't have a lot of tension
to be able to generate to to get any
kind of force to do that. On the
contrary, if somebody was
um strong, right, maybe even muscle
bound, I don't have any flexibility here
to again really create much of a elastic
output here or to get a lot of force
generation. But if I were to take this
band and sort of get that optimal amount
of flexibility, but also the strength in
this case, the muscles, the tension, I
can shoot that band a lot further, a
with a lot more force and a lot more
ease. Our goal should be not just
athletes should be striving for this,
but our goal should be to have the right
amount of muscular tension and force
capability with the flexibility and
mobility because that's only at that
point that you actually can express
probably the best performance possible.
How much work have I got to put in to
become more flexible and to improve my
mobility? Not not much. It just has to
be consistent. So, I mean, I think if
you were to devote even five to 10
minutes a day of stretching the areas
that are tight, and again, this is very
individual. Like, one thing that I
always stressed, even when I was in
baseball, every player from me got an
individual program, and it was based off
of a comprehensive assessment. So I
would go through the assessment on each
player and you would find that either
based on position um and the demands of
that position, body type, you would find
certain requirements of a program that
needed to be in place to maintain
optimal health. You would get tight in
certain areas. You would have things
that would need to be strengthened more
than others. People have to be willing
to a seek out where these the deficits
are and b to actually pursue a program
that would work on those deficits. And
then when you have that, again, the
comprehensive list doesn't have to be an
hour a day of doing those things. You
prioritize that list and you focus on 5
to 10 minutes of extra work with it.
It's funny. I make a lot of videos on,
hey, do this every morning, do that
every morning, do this every morning.
But it's only appropriate to the people
that have the deficits that I highlight
in the video. People think they have to
combine all of those things into a whole
separate career in order to be able to
pull them off. That's not necessary. You
can you find the ones that have the
biggest impact. But I don't think that
having, you know, doing stretching
requires long duration of these things.
It just simply requires consistency of
them. You you say that there are five
key exercises you need to be able to
maximize your longevity and quality of
life that kind of dovetail into this.
the single leg Romanian deadlift, the
squat and reach, the sumo stance hold,
the posterior chain push-up, and hip
abductions.
Can you show me these workouts? Sure.
As you can see from the space I'm in,
you don't need a whole lot of room to be
able to do these exercises. They're
incredibly accessible. They're actually
scalable with a low barrier of entry.
So, no matter what level of ability you
bring to these exercises, you're going
to be able to do them. All right, so the
first exercise up here is pretty simple,
but it does demand some balance. And it
also will teach us a very critical
biomechanical requirement, which is a
hip hinge. So, it's called the single
leg RDL. What you want to do is you want
to hinge. Pretending that there's a
drawer behind you that's open, you're
going to close it with your butt. Then,
you reach forward, but at the same time,
you kick back the opposite leg and
engage the glute on that side, lifting
it up to create a bit of a
counterbalance. So, your goal is to see
if you can get even up to 10 without
losing your balance or having that other
foot have to contact the ground. Next
exercise is something that we call a
squat and and reach. And what we do is
we get down to the ground like this,
down to a squatting position. And we
anchor our elbows into the sides of our
knees. Okay? And then from here we post
up on one hand, reach up and rotate and
follow it with your head as you go up as
high as you can to the sky. Now the goal
here is to try to hold this position for
up to 60 seconds. That is what is lost
when we get into these chronic positions
like this right with our devices at our
computers. We get to this rounded
thoracic spine, this upper portion of
the spine. Doing this will give us the
mobility that we're lacking. So the next
thing is something we call a sumo squat
stance. It's a squat stance hold and
it's based off of something called the
horse stance which again we work on
getting hip mobility and hip stability.
Right? And again we're going to still
work on the hip in all three planes. So
what we do is we get down feet wide and
squat down into this position here. Now
the beginner version of this is to
simply keep your elbows on your thighs
for a little bit of support. But what I
want to see as tall of a chest as I can
get the same way that we just did
through that rotation to maintain that
area of the spine, that thoracic spine,
and getting extended because we know
that when that spine is extended, the
shoulders will go with it and the
posture will get away from this position
and more to this open upright position.
If we don't do it in that beginner
format, then what we're going to do is
cross the hands over. Okay? Get in that
down position. Reach up and
out.
Okay, that is a 30 second hold up to a
60-second hold depending upon how far
you can take it. The next thing we do is
we got to work on that upper body a
little bit. So the upper body, you
should still be able to do the exercise
that is often times the benchmark for
upper body strength, which is the
push-up. But we can do it in a way where
we get bigger benefits both front and
back side. So we call this a posterior
chain push-up. For a push-up, you want
those hands underneath the shoulders.
Okay? I'll demonstrate one, then we'll
do it together. You want to be able to
push up all the way to full extension.
You also want to have tightness through
your quads and glutes. So you squeeze
your butt together. You straighten your
knees out by contracting your quads. And
then you get a good firm holding plank
position here. Now, when you go down,
normally people would stop here or they
wouldn't come up all the way. You go all
the way down to the ground. At this
point, you slide your hands out in front
of you, point your toes, keep those
quads contracted, squeezed, tight, and
then lift up into what we call a
superman. Right? From here, you're going
to train all the muscles in your
posterior chain from the back of your
heels all the way up to the tip of your
fingers. Right? Come down. Slide it
back. Come up into that good firm
push-up. Don't lose any of that
stability. Come down. Slide up. And
lift. The final thing is something that
looks so darn simple, but it actually
has a lot of functional carryover. We're
talking about just a sidelineing hip
abduction. Okay? And what we do is we
get in this position here. We position
our toe down in front of us. So, you
want to basically point your toe down
into the ground. Okay. From there,
you're going to slide your leg back
behind you. Okay? As far as you can take
it and then lift up. And right when you
do that final lift, you're going to feel
a contraction right here in the glutes.
in particular in the glute medius.
That's the muscle that's controlling
that rotational element of your hip
joint and the stability and the strength
that's needed to propel your body even
on a regular walk without your hips
dropping down side to side. You don't
want to let that happen to you. You want
to be able to hold this position for 30
to 60 seconds. Some of the mistakes
people make is in order to feel like
they're getting the lift, they'll just
rotate their body to let the hip flexor
do the lifting. Remember, we don't need
the hip flexor to do the lifting. We
want the glute medius to do the lifting.
So, you need to make sure that you're
rotated forward the entire time. And
that's it. There's the five essentials.
Quick, simple, and incredibly effective.
No fancy equipment, no gym required,
just a little bit of space and
consistency. Now, back to the diary of a
CEO studio. This one change has
transformed how my team and I move,
train, and think about our bodies. When
Dr. Daniel Lieberman came on the diio.
He explained how modern shoes with their
cushioning and support are making our
feet weaker and less capable of doing
what nature intended them to do. We've
lost the natural strength and mobility
in our feet and this is leading to
issues like back pain and knee pain. I'd
already purchased a pair of Viva
barefoot shoes. So I showed them to
Daniel Lieberman and he told me that
they were exactly the type of shoe that
would help me restore natural foot
movement and rebuild my strength. But I
think it was planttoicitis that I had
where suddenly my feet started hurting
all the time. And after that I decided
to start strengthening my own foot by
using the Vivo barefoots. And research
from Liverpool University has backed
this up. They've shown that wearing Vivo
barefoot shoes for 6 months can increase
foot strength by up to
60%. Visit
vivarefoot.com/doac and use code diary
20 from my sponsor for 20% off. A strong
body starts with strong
feet. And what what is the context there
with those workouts? Why why did you
choose those workouts and what do these
kind of signal? Are you saying that if
I'm able to do those then there's a
probability that I have the strength and
flexibility conducive with longevity?
Yeah, those are good standard exercises
that will measure at a at a high level
how much of a deficit you've acquired
over the years from not doing them. So,
you should maintain the ability to do
those exercises because they're going to
reflect the global approach at least to
working on flexibility in your groin or
working on the strength in your hip
abductors. Because the hip abductors, if
you look at most leg
exercises, the squat, the deadlift,
they're occurring in the sagittal plane,
which is this front to back plane. One
of my favorite exercises of all time is
the lunge, right? I love the exercise,
but it's still occurring front to back
in this plane here.
Getting exercises that work the other
two planes and mostly through rotation.
But working this frontal plane, this
side to side is really important to
producing a complete person, right, with
complete levels of strength. And because
they're not the primary exercises that
do that, like that sidelineing hip raise
that that we I show you is not one of
the big exercises that are most
important that are going to be up on
your list. you're going to do your
squats first and you're going to maybe
not never do those. But it doesn't mean
that that muscle didn't matter, right?
That those muscles are there for a
reason and they need to be developed. I
remember so many times taking some of
the most powerful baseball players, the
leading home run hitters, and then
testing their hip internal or external
stren uh rotation strength and it being
incredibly weak. Like incredibly weak.
And you say to yourself, "How is that
even possible?" because it was never
actually directly trained. And does it
have a carryover? Obviously, they're
doing really, really well in terms of
their performance on the field. I still
think it would have a carryover to
improve performance on the field, but
more importantly, one of the players in
question actually wound up having a lot
of knee pain throughout his his career.
And there are missed games because of
knee pain. What What could his career
stats have looked like? They're already
Hall of Fame worthy. What could his
career stats have looked like if he
didn't miss all those games? So they may
not have improved performance directly,
but they could have kept them healthier
and having other issues be avoided by
doing them. So I think that these types
of smaller movements are really
revealing of what might be going on
underneath. And the nice thing about
those is that anybody can do them. Like
it doesn't require a gym, doesn't
require an elaborate setup. They're
really good assessment tools for people
who just want to see where they stand.
Why did you bring the skeleton with you
with the bow tie? Uh the bow tie. I
mean, he came dressed even more than I
did. I think my t-shirt, but this is
Raymond. So X-ray is his full name, and
then Raymond became his uh short name.
So I I broke him out, God, I probably in
2011 or 12, and he became a fan favorite
pretty quickly. But I think people like
the visual. And for me, he's not the
most mobile guy. He's lost his lower
arm. He doesn't have another arm on this
side, and he doesn't really move that
well. But what it is important is he's
also lost his legs. He's lost his legs.
I got a leg over there if I need it. But
the spine. See, for me, again, I focus a
lot
on the ability to function in space. And
rotation is probably the area of biggest
deficit. It's what we lose the most. And
the reason for that is because the area
of the spine that's most responsible for
functional rotation of the torso is
going to be here in the thoracic spine.
So what that is is anybody that wants to
measure on themselves, it's right at the
bottom of the of the neck. So at the
base of the neck, the height of the
shoulders, and it runs down just to
below the rib cage. So right where the
rib cage ends is where the thoracic
spine ends. It has so many farreaching
implications because it shares its range
of
motion between two different directions.
So its ability to go front to back
again, he can bend forward and back. We
can slump forward, we can go back,
right? You want to have ideally about 40
degrees of flexion in that area and
about 25 degrees of extension through
that area. And just us sitting here
alone, you know, we probably tended to
get a little bit of this posture while
we were getting comfortable and talking.
We kind of get a little bit rounded out.
When you use up motion in this
direction, and imagine what that looks
like when people are on their phones or
at a desk all day, you're going to start
to lose the motion into extension.
You're going to get too flex. Well,
every time you lose a degree into
flexion, you actually lose a direct
degree into rotation. So, you're because
you're sharing that motion. The motion
is only available in a combined way. So,
if you want to take up motion this
direction, there's going to be less
motion available here. If I have a a a
thing, if you let me grab this, put this
over your back. Over my back. Yeah. Just
like this. Yeah.
Now, allow yourself to slump forward.
Pretend you're on that phone, right? Get
there. Now, just turn from the shoulders
in one direction. Slumped over. Okay.
Now, take a peek down the barrel of that
thing, you know, behind you and see
where you're pointing. How about how far
rotated you are? Yeah. All right. Cool.
Now, come back. Reset yourself. Now,
take back that mobility that you lost
through your thoracic spine. I'm getting
crumpled. There's your rotator cuff. So,
get yourself up right now. Nice posture.
Act like I'm I'm watching, right? So,
get there. Now go ahead and rotate again
in that
direction. How much more did you get?
Yeah, I got another like 20%. Right. So
maintaining thoracic extension maintains
your ability to rotate. The ability to
rotate in space is one of the most
important functional requirements we
have. When you're when you're falling as
you get older, you're likely reaching
spontaneously to grab something to
regain control before you crash down and
maybe break a hip. Mhm. Functionally as
an athlete, your ability to perform is
all about rotation. You know, you don't
usually just move in one plane like
this. If you're a football player,
American or not, you're rotating all the
time. You generate force as a soccer
player, you know, by kicking across your
body, right? By throwing a baseball,
it's all about rotation. You need to
hold on to rotation. But what what we
lose is the ability to extend at our
spine. By the age of between 50 and 60,
people will have lost 25 to 35% of their
ability, their mobility in this area.
You see it as well. You see what people
get older, they look stiff and they kind
of look robotic. Awful. My grandmother,
God bless her soul, she lived to 97
years old. Wow. But at that age, she was
literally a right angle. She was
literally she had a walker. She was
completely bent over at that walker.
Could hardly get herself back up. She
had lost all of her extension. So, she
could not rotate at all. And again,
functionally, it's the most important
movement you can make, I think, is to be
able to rotate through your torso to be
able to do things. So, I think that
people need to focus on, again, you go
back to that whole concept of like, what
do you need to focus on? Well, I could
tell you some great exercises to do to
maintain your strength, but if in the
process of getting a really strong
squat, you've also lost thoracic
rotation. I can't deem you to be a
really healthy individual because you've
you've you've given up one of the most
important things that you need to
maintain. Cuz I I thought that aging and
then basically turning into that right
angle was just inevitable because you
see it in so many older people. They
often are like bent over and you you
kind of think, well, why don't they just
stand up? Yeah. Well, it's it's
impossible because, you know, you're
losing that that fight to gravity,
right? Gravity is going to win
ultimately, but it doesn't have to win
completely. So, the more that you work
on maintaining your ability to extend
through the thoracic spine, then you
don't develop those downstream
adaptations that happen from always
being there. So, what happens once you
get in this position, you lose
flexibility through other joints. Again,
if you get get in that position again,
actually turn a little bit. Try to raise
your arm up as high as you can from that
position. Okay. Now, just straighten
yourself out. Go up tall. Now, raise
your arm up again. Like, yeah. Why?
Because you've literally mechanically
blocked your shoulder because your
shoulder blade has to be able to rotate
around your rib cage as you raise your
arm up overhead. Okay. Right. A great
percentage of ability to move your arm
over your head is not just the ball and
socket that's over here to get your arm
up there. It's the fact that your
shoulder blade has to rotate with it to
allow it to go up there. I could
actually block your overhead mobility if
I went behind you right now and just
held your shoulder blade. If I held your
shoulder blade in place, you wouldn't be
able to raise your arm up maybe more
than here because it has to rotate in
order to be able to get to the top.
So when you realize that this epicenter
of dysfunction can have these
far-reaching benefits where all of a
sudden a perfectly healthy shoulder
can't move up overhead and then what
happens then if you can't move your arm
up overhead right and I say Stephen get
your arm up over your head like I can't
no get your arm over your head you'd go
like this you you'd lean your body back
because your arm can't get any higher so
you're going to lean your body back what
are you leaning from your low back so
now all of a sudden you're asking a an
area of your spine that's supposed to be
stable, right? The low back, the lumbar
spine is supposed to be a stable area of
your body. You're asking it to now
become a mobile area of your body. And
you're you're asking for motion that
it's not naturally inclined to want to
give you because this area didn't give
it to you, right? The upper thoracic
area didn't give it to you. So now what
does that happen? Now you're asking that
to do too much. The muscles can become
spasm. You can damage the joints in your
low back. Now you're causing a problem
somewhere else. So this area has has all
these farreaching benefits. Another
thing that can happen too is when you're
down like this, I mentioned that this
area of the spine we tal about is
actually connected to the ribs. Yeah. If
you're in this compressed position where
you're rounded forward, hunched over,
you actually don't even get good lung
inflation. It's like trying to inflate a
balloon inside of a box that won't open.
You can't get the lungs to inflate
properly. lack of properly uh operating
lungs are going to cause you to be more
fatigued throughout the day and they
cause you to feel uh less rested at
night. So these the this area has so
many up and down ramifications that you
need to really focus on it and it it's
one of those things again if you were to
ask me how many people do I think
directly work on this area
10%. At most what have I got to be doing
that at my age? I'm I'm 30 in my early
30s now. What have I got to be doing now
to make sure that when I get older I'm
not hunched over and I am I do have that
full range of mobility? Yeah, there's a
few things like again anytime you try to
approach any of these dysfunctions, you
know, we talk about um the mobility
flexibility part being the the
foundation of that. But then there's
also a strength component because like
you can free up the mobility and
flexibility, but can you maintain it?
The strength is just going to help you
to maintain it. From a mobility
flexibility standpoint, you can simply
go up against a wall, right? And what
you what what you're supposed to do
there is put the back of your head
against the wall, your upper back
against the wall, and your butt against
the wall. So, you're going as flat as
you can, and you put your arms back up
against the wall themselves. So, the
back of your forearms is all up against
the wall. Now, one of the requirements
to be able to get there is going to have
good mobility or flexibility through
your rotator cuff muscles because your
rotator cuff as it gets tight wants to
internally rotate your arms. Can you get
them back this way? Can you get your
elbows forward, but your your arms
You're doing a pretty good job. You can
see I can see some deficits there. So,
can I get in that position when I'm
there? Can I then raise them up against
that wall flat? And as I do, the only
way I'm going to be able to do that is
to maintain that thoracic extension
because what's going to happen is if you
lose that, as soon as you try to raise
your arms up, it's just going to fold
you forward from the wall and you're not
going to be able to get up there. You
can do stretches where you take that
dowel that's that that we had there. You
would lay on the ground face down.
Dowels over your over your back like
that. You spread your legs. So you look
kind of like a like a maybe an X with
your hands out here and your legs
spread. And all you do is you rotate
around. So you're trying to basically
rotate up towards the ceiling. That dial
is going to travel back behind you. And
you're pretty much isolating the
rotation through the low through that
midback through that thoracic spine. And
so you're getting rotation and extension
because it's causing you to do this and
lean backwards. There's another exercise
um I have that's called the bridge and
reach over. And the bridge and reach
over is you push up through you're on
your back. You do a regular bridge like
a glute bridge. But then as you get to
the top, you reach across your body and
try to touch behind you over the
opposite shoulder. So again, what are
you getting there? you're getting
extension through that spine and the
rotation together to see if you can
combine those movements and again take
back that range of motion that's being
shared between those two functions.
These are all things that anybody can
do. Like anybody can do them. And maybe
you won't do them well in the beginning
because you are restricted. But these
are the types of things that improve as
you do them. And again, don't don't look
for perfection right away. But the nice
thing about these drills is they don't
have to be done for more than a few
weeks consistently to actually start to
see the benefits and to feel what
happens when you start to become less
restricted here. So if I just did five
or 10 minutes a day of some of these
drills, you think the net impact over
time would be pretty profound? very very
I think that again I think people don't
realize the minimal time investment
that's required um it just needs to be
done each day right those little
deposits have to be made each day and
they pay off in big dividends if you do
and is it important for me to train for
a long time or for a more intense but
shorter period how do you think about
that yeah so I always say you can train
long or you can train hard but you can't
do both right and I think that
especially as you get older, I
think you need to minimize the rotations
on the tire, right? The how many tire
rotations are you getting? Because even
if I just raise my arm up overhead and I
just do it a thousand times a day, I'm
still moving my arm up in that position.
And every time I move it up, even on
here in this limited capacity to move
here with this guy, like you're still
getting some of that rubbing and and
grinding in that joint. And if you have
any degenerative changes, if you've
occur, if you've acquired any type of
bone spur in your shoulder and this is
rubbing up against that each time, it's
like taking a rope and rubbing it over
and back over sort of a sharp edge,
right? Eventually, it just starts to
fray and fray and fray. I'd rather you
trade that in the repetitions for the
intensity because the the tension
delivered to the muscle with the higher
level of of weight that you're using or
the intensity of the technique that
you're using is going to have bigger
benefits in a in a faster way than just
accumulating a lot of high repetitions.
Now, that's not to say that you can't
actually benefit from high repetitions
and develop muscle. You can. And they've
actually shown um recently that anywhere
between five and 30
repetitions taken close to or all the
way to failure can stimulate muscle
growth. This the absolute load is
sometimes not even as important as long
as the effort is there. But I believe
that as you get older, you got to kind
of spare some of those repetitions
because it has that same effect that
just wearing down those tires would
have. ultimately you're gonna have to
change the tires and we may not be able
to change these tires as easily. What
about um the importance of form when
we're training? It's one of the things
you're known for is emphasizing that
form really matters. And you know, there
might be another school of thought that
says, listen, it hurts, so it must be
doing something. Yeah, people think that
a lot. They think, well, listen, my
muscles are hurting, so clearly it
worked. Form is very important because I
think doing things in proper form do two
things. Number one, it keeps you safe.
You know, most likely if you can do
something in good form, then you're in
command of the weight that you're you're
lifting and therefore it's likely going
to um do what it's supposed to do with
the least detrimental effect from doing
it. In terms of the leeway that you
have, I think that depends upon the goal
that you that you're trying to achieve.
So, if you're trying to
achieve muscle growth, I I'm a big
believer that muscle growth is not
given. and it is taken and you need to
force yourself. You need to force your
body to make a change because your body
wants to stay in a state of homeostasis.
It wants to stay the same and getting it
to deliver new muscle tissue to your
body is metabolically demanding or it's
creating more tissue that's going to
require a higher metabolic demand. It
doesn't want to do that. Again,
homeostasis states that it wants to keep
you the same. You have to take that and
the only way to take that is to put
forth an effort and an intensity that is
above and beyond what your body is able
to do right now. That's why I I am a big
believer in performing our sets to
failure. Not because I think that
absolute failure is 100% necessary, but
it's the only objective end point for
you and I to speak the same language
here. Because if you go to the point
where you cannot lift the weight again
in good form, then I I pretty
comfortable in saying, "Well, Stephen,
you went to failure." Good. So, I know
you went far enough. If you stop at an
estimated one or two reps shy, which is
what research would say is okay, you
know, passable, same result potentially.
How do I know it was really one or two
reps? I don't. I don't. Because I I
think if if there's a gun to your head,
you might say, "Oh, I could do two
more." Well, now it wasn't one to two,
it was four. and four is completely not
as effective, if not at all, compared to
the one to two in reserve. So, when you
do these
exercises to this degree of effort,
there's going to be a little bending of
form. Now, I'm not saying that the form
should break down. You might find an
abbreviated range of motion. You might
find a little bit more momentum
involved. That's all okay for me. Um, as
long as it's still controlled. If the
exercise you're doing no longer
resembles what you were doing in the
beginning, then you're not doing it
right. Your form has broken down to a
point where I don't think you're getting
the benefits of that. You might not even
actually be training the muscles you
were trying to train. Right? You might
have shifted the focus for you started
the exercise, it was supposed to be for
your chest, but by the time you're done,
it's for everything but your chest
because you're just trying to move your
body through space. That's not effective
if you're trying to build muscle. You
want to direct attention into the
muscles you're trying to build. And
sometimes form can become a little bit
laxed in that pursuit, but not to the
point where you're actually taking it
off of the muscles. Again, this is just
jumping a bit back backwards, but um a
conversation I had with one of my
friends the other day was about nerd
neck and is there a consequence to the
fact that we all walk around now staring
downwards? Like for these this whole
conversation, I'll be looking up at you,
but most of the time I'm also staring
downwards at my notes and and stuff. And
if I'm not here, then I'm on my phone
and I'm staring downwards. And we spend
most of our lives now staring downwards.
And I just wondered if you how you think
about that. And it's good. It's good.
It's a good um it is a good connection
back to what we talked about because I
believe that still comes from that
epicenter of dysfunction which is that
thoracic spine because when you go like
this, right, you're actually internally
rotating the arms too. So this this is e
internal rotation of the shoulders. If I
go that way, right, that's the external
rotation. If I do it the way we're just
doing it up against the wall, that's
external rotation. more difficult when
you're higher than when you're lower.
But when you're in this position, once
you do this, what tends to follow is
that spine tends to follow you in that
direction. When you start to round here,
nerd neck is more of a consequence of
what's happening back there. Because
when you're here, what do you got to do?
Yeah. Got to look up, right? Because our
eyes always want to see in front of us.
So, it's not that your neck is
necessarily being pulled in that
direction or the fact that you're
looking down. It's the fact that your
body is following that. And when it
follows the adaptation is well, okay,
now I've developed these tightnesses
this way and I've lost that mobility
into extension of my back. What do I do
to compensate? I got to look up. So now
I'm walking around looking like this.
And that's that sort of nerd neck. I
think I think nerd neck is less of
something you have to treat from a neck
situation and more of something you have
to treat from that back mobility. You've
made a lot of videos that pertain to
injuries, common injuries that we get
when we're working out and training.
What are the most common but avoidable
injuries, and how do I avoid them?
Because I I care a lot about this now
that I'm getting older. In fact, as we
sit here, as I said to you, I've I've
pulled some like ligaments in my ankle,
and I was at the physio yesterday, and
I've been on crutches, and I've got this
big boot I have to wear. And it's not
until you get injured, that you realize
how imperative it was for you to avoid
this. Yeah. because it puts you for me
it's completely changes my whole it
changes my whole life. Not only can't I
like just move through a space normally
but then I can't train. I'm going to get
weaker. It's going to have an impact on
my metabolic health. It's going to
therefore have an impact potentially on
my sleep um my cognition and everything
downstream. So I go okay I should
actually have an injury prevention
program. So what are the most commonly
occurring injuries and what advice would
you give me to avoid them? Let's see.
So, first of all, I take personal
offense to you calling yourself old at
32. Well, a bit older. I don't know what
that makes me, but I feel like a the
keeper. But you just start to like
You do though. When I was a kid playing
soccer, I could play for 3 four hours. I
didn't stretch and I was fine. These
days, I I have a 100% injury rate if I
don't stretch and if I don't warm up and
if I don't really really think about it.
100% injury rate. I'm like, I'm I'm on
my way downhill, you know? Well, I mean,
you're certainly going in the wrong
direction, but I I think when it comes
to
injury, prep preparation does go a long
way towards helping someone to avoid it.
It doesn't it's not completely
avoidable. I actually tore my bicep in
this arm. But when it comes to the more
common ones, I think you could look to
the joints that are
either built to be mobile that aren't
being controlled or built to be stable
that are being asked to do too many
things. So what is that? If you look at
your shoulder, right, it's a ball.
Again, we can look at that. It's a ball
and socket, right? It's got the ball
inside the socket. It's supposed to be
able to move in all kinds of directions.
We can move it all everywhere. If you
look at the the the leg, right? We don't
have the other part of the hip, but we
have the ball from the ball and socket.
It's meant to be able to go in all
directions. When those joints, the
shoulder and the hip
are uncontrolled, meaning you're lacking
strength in the muscles that control the
movement of that joint. That's when you
actually wind up having issues. So, what
are the what are the muscles that
control that? Well, we talked about um
one of those smaller exercises before,
the glute medius. um that muscle
controls motion of the hip in that
frontal plane. So not just in this front
to back squat, lunge, deadlift
direction, but this frontal side to side
plane. It controls the movements of the
hips this way. If you don't train them,
they're not going to magically get
strong. Like they they have a function,
and if you're not challenging that
function, then you're not strengthening
that muscle. It seems like a lot. It is
a lot. It is a lot. But I mean, you
could acquire the strength you need
there with one exercise. You know, the
function is hip abduction. So, you could
do some of the sidelineing hip um uh
lifting or leg lifting. You could do
something more challenging where you
perform a lunge, but interestingly, all
you have to do is weight on one side.
So, if I were to say, "All right,
Stephen, what do you normally do? What
do you normally do for lunges? How much
weight do you hold in your hands when
you do a regular lunge? Or do you not do
lunges? I don't do many lunges. Got to
do lunges." So, let's say you're doing
like or Bulgarian split squat, another
one of my favorite exercises where you
put one leg back on the bench. I would
say hold the weight in one hand. So, now
if you're doing a lunge and I put a 50
or 60 pound dumbbell in your hand on one
side and then you go and you lunge out,
that weight want, you know, you're in
the split position now with one leg out
in front. The weight on this side
totally wants to pull you in that
direction. You have to pull back on this
side through the muscles on the outside
of the opposite hip to keep you in this
position. And I can say, I'm gonna make
this even harder. Go slow. Go really
slow. So now you're stepping out. You're
on one leg as you're stepping. So now
you're on one leg and you're being
pulled here. Now you land, the leg drops
down or the, you know, the the dumbbell
wants to drop you down. You stay up
there. I make you hold it for even a
second or two in the bottom position
because your body is just aching to want
to move in that direction. I've just
trained your hip abduction strength in
this frontal plane on an exercise that's
truly a sagittal plane exercise front to
back. So, I have ways that I can
actually trick you into getting these
things accomplished at the same time
you're training something else. So, it's
not always an extra thing that you have
to do. You could actually do this in a
way that you know is sort of part of
what you do. So, what do you do then? If
if I were saying to you, I want to have
a comprehensive workout and you are
designing my 7-day workout plan. What
would you give me to do? One of the best
ways to train is with an upper lower
split or with a push pull leg split. And
again, if you were to do a push pull
legs, I would I would then have to have
you include your shoulders along with
your chest and triceps there, right?
Because it's your only shot in that week
to do your shoulder work. And again, as
a pushing muscle, it would go on the
same day. So Monday, what do I do
Monday? So you could do push there,
right? But my one caveat to a push pull
legs is that it it tends to be a lot,
right? Like you're you're
doing shoulders, chest, triceps. Some
people don't like that amount of of
volume, right? What's push when you say
push? Someone that doesn't know. Yeah.
So push is just the muscles who share a
similar function of pushing. So, if you
look at a bench press, it's pushing the
weight away from you is the concentric
action that you're doing. If I looked at
a lat pull down, I'm pulling the weight
towards me. That's the concentric part
of it. If I'm doing a bicep curl, I'm
pulling it towards
me. Triceps, shoulders, chest,
everything is pushing. I'm pushing away
this way. Pushing away that way.
Push-up, I'm pushing away from the
ground. Tricep push downs, I'm it's in
the name itself. I'm pushing down
through a tricep push down. Um, I'm
doing tricep, you know, lying
extensions. I'm pushing the weight away.
They would all go on a similar day.
Again, I like the the function of that
because it's optimal recovery. So, why
that's why that's good if you could
tolerate, you know, I'm asking, you
know, if that's okay for you to do that
because you have you're not naturally
adding shoulders in. If you were to okay
with adding shoulders in, then you would
do your push workout. And then what I
would do is know that I'm getting enough
recovery in between workouts because I
could give you a day off in terms of
your weight training on Tuesday. Come
back and do Wednesday legs, right? So So
Monday, I'm just doing push upper body.
Push. Yeah. Well, it's Yeah. Just push
upper body. Okay. Tuesday, you're going
to give me the day off. Tuesday get the
day off. Yeah. Then there's two I'm
going to give you two variations of
this. Okay. And when I say day off, we
could we we if you were with me, you'd
be doing conditioning. All right. So,
we'll get into that, but that but it
would be Yeah, it's not a day off. No,
you give me seven days. I I'll I'll take
a ball seven. Even if I'm just doing ab
work on some, but you you then on
Wednesday would come back and do your
your leg workout. And what leg workout
am I doing on Wednesday? So, it's going
to be front anterior posterior. So, I'm
going to train your hamstrings, your
glutes, and your quads. Everything will
get done together. Thursday, you'd have
another day off. Okay. Again, likely not
a day off. Some conditioning. And then
the uh Friday could be your your pull
workout. Now, what's nice about that is
if you are somebody that doesn't recover
as well as others, and this is not
everybody, but that gives you a really
good amount of recovery between those
workouts. If you could tolerate more
than that, the first step I would do is
add a total body workout one more time.
So, I could come back on Saturday and
add a total body workout. It would just
be a little bit light on the pull
because you just did that or you did it
the day before. So you my whole body on
Saturday. You could do it. You know when
I mean like I would pick very big
compound movements that are
representative of including as many
muscles as possible at one time. Okay.
And I can shy off a little bit back off
a little bit off of the pull that you
were doing because I realized that you
just did certain exercises the day
before. So I would if I trained you on
and this gets a little nuanced, but if I
trained you on Friday and a pull
workout, remember I have different
planes of motion. and I can move in. So
if you were doing vertical pulling stuff
like a pull-up or a pull down, I could
stress more horizontal pulling exercises
like a seated row or bent over row,
right? So I could shift the focus a
little bit and then Sunday Sunday I
break. Yeah, I definitely I mean I I
definitely don't advocate seven days a
week of full training. Where would I be
doing my cardiovascular work in this in
this particular week? So in that in that
scenario, I'd have you do your
conditioning work on Tuesdays and
Thursdays. So, I had to And if you were
gonna, if you had, you know, your goals
were more aligned with fat loss and
overall conditioning and you feel like
you're, you know, not as healthy as you
could be there, I would probably take
advantage of that Saturday to do that.
But if your priority was the training
side of it, getting stronger, building
more muscle, then I would take advantage
of that Saturday as my my flex day to do
training. And you don't put the cardio
on the same day as the upper body legs
workouts. It could be, but if your
priority again is to build muscle, then
prioritize muscle building. Put that
first. Do your cardio conditioning work
at the end of that workout. Something
might suffer. And the thing that usually
comes second is what suffers. If we
think just about Monday, which we had
down is the push day. So that's me doing
like chest and is it uh triceps and
shoulders. How many if I'm training for
one hour, how many reps are you trying
to do per muscle and how many like sets?
So set count, you know, if you can get
in, and again, this is a little bit
determined by um whether you're going to
train on that Saturday. So if you're
going to come back and train total body
on Saturday, then I I know I have an
opportunity to maybe do a bench again on
Saturday or a variation of bench, an
incline bench. So I don't have to get
all of my chest volume in in that first
day. But typically, you're looking for
around anywhere between nine and 16 sets
or so for that muscle group across the
week. So, if you were going to do, let's
say, the one workout for chest and
you're doing, say, three uh sets per
exercise, you're in that range of around
uh three exercises, right, for chest.
Now, you don't have to have that. The
volume doesn't need to be as high for
triceps because you're obviously
training your triceps while you're doing
bench press. So, you could put one
direct tricep exercise in. If it was me,
I would put something, my favorite
exercise for triceps is the lion tricep
extension where I lay on my back on the
bench and I do the, you know, they some
people call them skull crushers or nose
breakers. Just take the bicep for as an
example. How often do I need to train
and how intense do I need to train the
bicep for it to grow? And conversely, if
I just left my bicep alone, how long
would it take for me to lose the muscle?
Yeah. Interesting. So, um I think this
is one of the most fascinating areas of
training that has yet to be uncovered.
Um I actually discussed this with with
Andrew Huberman at one point. It's like
it's very interesting. So from person to
person, we know that there are different
recovery rates between the people. From
person to person, we know that there are
different recovery rates between
muscles. like you might do the same
bicep workout I do and need more time to
recover than I would. What's interesting
is from the individual themselves,
certain muscle groups require more or
less frequency to recover from. So I
might find that I could train my biceps
every three days, but I could never
train my back every three days or I
could never train my chest every three
days. It's just so intricate because
every muscle is going to be different
for every person. And even at a at a
holistic one level, you you're just not
going to find the same recovery rate
across the board for every muscle in
your body. So I a lot of times I think
people should rely on a little bit of
training intuition to say, "Hey, like am
I increasing my weights? Is my strength
going up on the lift? Am I feeling
excited to train that muscle when I go
to train it? If I am, then I'm probably
recovering well. And you can experiment
with like hitting it again more
frequently. I think in the big picture,
the more frequently that you can
stimulate a muscle, the better the
results are going to be. You have this
um contraption on the desk in front of
us.
This this thing here. Yeah. A lot so
many people talk to me about this device
and it's it's quite strange how
important people say that this device is
and what it tells us. I was doing some
reading beforehand. It's a grip strength
Yeah. reader monitor and there's some
really crazy stats that I found. There
was a 2015 Lancet study across 17
countries that found for every 5
kilogram decrease in grip strength, it
was associated with a 16% high risk of
death, a 17% higher risk of heart
disease, and a 7% higher risk of stroke.
And a 2018 study in the Journal of
Alzheimer's disease found that people
with low grip strength had a 68% high
risk of developing Alzheimer's. There
was another another study that linked it
to other cardiovascular um and blood
issues. And another study that shows
that older adults in the lowest third of
grip strength were 2.5 times more likely
to fall and be hospitalized with their
injuries. And one study found that grip
strength predicted upper body strength
by 70%. And lastly, adults over 65 with
weak grip strength were 2.1 times more
likely to become dependent in daily
activities within 3 years. That was in
the journal of gurontology.
Grip strength. Pretty important, huh?
Um, a lot of that research has been
determined to be more uh correlative
than causitive.
But the fact is that maintaining your
grip strength is very important. So what
I mean by the correlative causitive
thing is that what they find is that
people that maintain their grip strength
throughout life are probably doing so
because they're regularly engaging in
physical activity. uh likely they are
lifting weights, they're holding heavy
weights, they're having to um manipulate
their body in space if they're doing
calisthenic exercises. So there's a
level of activity that remains
in their grip that probably keeps their
level of strength at a higher level. So
you're selecting out people that are
just generally maintaining their
fitness, in which case they're probably
maintaining higher levels of health and
lower issues as they age. So it's not
the the strength in which we can grip
that matters necessarily, but the thing
that matters is upstream from that and
downstream is our ability to grip. So
it's just one it's almost like a a
symptom of something upstream which is
positive, right? Or lacking, right? not
you're not doing enough of. Um that
being said, you can actually directly
relate or measure your ability to
recover from exercise um based upon
having a a baseline understanding of
what your grip strength is and then
monitoring what that is over the over
you know weeks or months of training.
So, if you were to measure your grip
strength with a tool like this in the
morning, five mornings in a row, and
average it out in a at a time where you
feel like you're feeling energetic and
good, that will give you a good baseline
of what your grip strength is. What's a
good grip strength? So, most men would
be somewhere between 100 I'll talk in
pounds, 100 to 120 pounds. So, if you
look at that, that's around 46 kilos to
54 kilos. Um, if you you want to give it
a shot, see where you stack up. So, to
do this now, there's some rules here.
Yeah. Don't go like this. You know, keep
it in here. Don't touch your arm to the
table at all. Keep it Yeah. 90° like
that. Yep. And then you're just going to
squeeze, you know, one good effort as
hard as you can. Wish me luck. All
right. Don't blow out now.
All right. Let's see. Oh gosh, my head
nearly exploded.
130. So, you're you're above average. So
doing well on grip strength. So now what
you would do is and you would test both
sides. You could average out the sides.
Sometimes you're going to have one
obviously one side's stronger than the
other. You would then have a good
baseline. If you were feeling like you
weren't sure if you recovered or not,
you would test this in the morning. Not
Can I try this side as well? Yeah. This
is my So this is my weaker. All right.
Here we go. My weaker hand. All right.
You got to beat it though now. Oh gosh.
It's a bit slippery.
I think you did. Did I beat it? Oh my
god. Wow. 160. No, you're joking.
160. 160. So, you probably if you did
the other side again, give it another
shot. If you did the other side again,
you think I'd beat it? No. No. You're
not going to beat You're going to beat
your old performance, but you're not
going to beat you're not going to beat
the the left side.
Are you left-handed? I'm I'm
right-handed. So, that was strange.
Okay.
All right. Let's see what you got.
150 now. See, I have my prediction is
right. So, a lot of times it takes a
little accommodation to the to this the
stress of of of doing that. What's your
grip strength? Uh, I don't know. I
haven't touched it in a while. See, now
you're going to show me left and right.
All right, let's see. We're going to ask
if some of my team members if they want
to give it a shot. All right, here we
go.
Wow.
Crunching.
130. Okay. On that side and your left
side. All right, let's see. Anyone else
want to do it? B, you want to give it a
shot? Try to do with all the popping
without the popping. That was my bicep
that popped, by the way.
110. Okay. So, you're right. And I'm
right-handed.
So, it was 130, right? 130 versus 110 on
this side. So, I fall in the range of
average, but not not super human for
sure, but you try. Sure. But you're most
certainly way stronger than me. Not in
grip strength, but you're stronger than
me at bicep curls, bench press,
everything else. Yeah. I mean it is it
is this is again un underscoring why
some of these things need to be trained
individually. Okay. All right. So now
hold it like this. Mhm. Yep. And then
you're just going to one one hand right
squeeze as hard as you can for as kind
of a short burst. Okay. All
right. There you go. Let's take a look.
Wow. 100. Now women's average grip
strength is 60 to 80 pounds. So you're
actually much stronger than the average
woman.
I started my first business at 12 years
old and then I started more businesses
at 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. And at that
time, what I didn't realize is that
being a founder with no money meant that
I also had to be the marketeteer, the
sales rep, the finance team, customer
service, and the recruiter. But if
you're starting a business today,
thankfully there's a tool that wears all
of those hats for you, our sponsor
today, which is Shopify. Because of all
of its AI integrations, using Shopify
feels a bit like you've hired an entire
growth team from day one, taking care of
writing product descriptions, your
website design, and enhancing your
products images, not to mention the bits
you'd expect Shopify to handle, like the
shipping, like the taxes, like the
inventory. And if you're looking to get
your business started, go to
shopify.com/bartlet and sign up for a $1
per month trial. That's
shopify.com/bartlet.
This has never been done before. A
newsletter that is ran by 100 of the
world's top CEOs. All the time people
say to me, they say, "Can you mentor me?
Can you get this person to mentor me?
How do I find a mentor?" So, here is
what we're going to do. You're going to
send me a question. And the most popular
question you send me, I'm going to text
it to 100 CEOs, some of which are the
top CEOs in the world running a hundred
billion dollar companies. And then I'm
going to reply to you via email with how
they answered that question. You might
say, "How do you hold on to a
relationship when you're building a
startup? What is the most important
thing if I've got an idea and don't know
where to start?" We email it to the
CEOs. They email back. We take the five,
six top best answers. We email it to
you. I was nervous because I thought the
marketing might not match the reality.
But then I I saw what the founders were
replying with and their willingness to
reply and I thought actually this is
really good and all you've got to do is
sign up completely free and can I train
my grip strength individually if I
wanted to improve it as an individual
thing where I just have to grip. Yeah, I
mean you know they they one of the
easiest ways to do it is with those
oldfashioned little grippers, you know,
that you just squeeze and they make them
in some really really uh heavy
resistance levels now for people that
are have worked on it and actually
improved. When I was young, they're
pretty easy to conquer with a little bit
of training. You'd be able to squeeze
them because they never really made the
resist resistance high enough, but now
it's definitely something that you could
uh uh you could be challenged by. The
other thing I I wanted to talk to you
about, which we've touched on briefly,
but I think is important to talk about
because I don't think people realize how
how prevalent it is, is back pain. I was
looking at some stats beforehand, and it
says that 80% of people will experience
back pain at some point in their lives.
It's actually the leading cause of
disability worldwide. And in the UK,
over 10 million work days are lost every
year due to back pain. One in six
hospital visits in Britain are related
to back pain. It's the most common
reason for people under 45 to see a
doctor. And chronic back pain, which is
sort of just enduring back pain, affects
about one in five adults in the UK. And
there's five of us in this room now in
total. And so, one of us
probabilistically is going to have
chronic back pain. Is this something one
can avoid? I I asked this in part
because I spoke to some I think the
anthropologists who go and look at the
tribes in Africa and they find that back
pain just doesn't exist there. It's not
a thing. I think the likelihood that
you're going to experience back pain at
some point in your life is is high. But
that recurring back pain and that
chronic back pain, I think that's that's
entirely avoidable.
Um 26% of the time at any one time in
the United States, people have are going
to be dealing with back pain. So kind of
with the numbers that you just said
there, the other thing I I find
interesting is that the second leading
cause of trips to the doctor in the
United States is back pain behind
respiratory infection. So if you think
about how often, especially this time of
year, my own kids have been in at least
four or five times, you know, to the
doctor for respiratory infection, it
starts to an eye openener like wow, you
know, and this is and this is something
that's somewhat preventable. We need to
do something about it to prevent it. The
problem is that it can come from so many
different causes. You know, we we talked
about before how the limitation in that
thoracic mobility could ask the low back
to do more than it could and therefore
cause strain there. Now, here's the good
part about this though. 80% of people or
85% will have low back pain in their
life. Only 27 to 35% of the time is it
discreated. So, we're talking about, you
know, if we look back on this guy again,
it's the it's the discs, you know,
between the vertebrae, right? The the
the vertebral discs that create that
spacing and the cushioning between the
the vertebrae and our spine. When one of
those discs, actually, this is one of
them dislodged itself. But when the disc
that sits above and below these two
levels pushes outward or herniates, it
could it could push on any one of these
nerves that's traveling downward.
Anytime you get any touching of this
nerve with some other structure, in this
case the disc, you get the radiating
symptoms that go down whatever dermatome
this is. What that means is this nerve
will feed some function of the lower
body or some sensory area of the lower
body depending upon where people
complain of pain like, oh, I feel it in
my hip or I feel it in my leg around my
knee or or I feel it down behind my knee
down to my foot. you pretty much know
what level of disc problem they have
because it's representative of the level
of herniation. When you press on
something that is at the level of like
L5S1, right, the last lumbar vertebrae
in the first sacral vertebrae, it's
going to give you symptoms like
numbness, tingling down near the back of
your calf underneath your foot. If you
get something more around the hip, you
know, a lot of times people complain of
hip pain. They think they have they have
a hip issue. it's actually a back issue
that's pressing on a nerve that wraps
around that area. So that's an L2 L3 or
L30 L4. You get indicators of where
that's coming from. Again, the good news
is if you don't have this this
neurological deficit in your lower body,
this tingling, numb, numbness, weakness,
um it's mostly muscle and origin. Now
again, even of the discreated issues,
the 27 to
35% 96% of those are not operated on.
So, think about the impact you can have
if we're saying that pretty much every
single instance of low back pain that
you have is going to be able to be
addressed through non-operative
strengthening or stretching intervention
because a lot of times, as we said, what
are what's the cause of the dysfunction?
Is it coming from that thoracic spine
lack of extension? Cool. Okay. Well,
let's work on it. So, let's start try to
restore that thoracic spine extension.
Is it coming from a weak glute? Right?
Having weak glutes because again the the
the the role of the glutes from the
bottom up is to extend the hip. In other
words, kick the leg back behind you. If
I can't get my leg back behind me and
I'm trying to basically extend my body
by doing that when I step through and
get behind me. Well, how can I do that?
Once again, I could do it from the low
back by overexaggerating and stepping in
where it's not supposed to. Always
remember the low back is supposed to be
the st the the stability center of your
spine. It's supposed to provide
stability. If you're not getting
mobility from your hip or from your
thoracic spine up and above and below,
it's going to ask for it from the next
place above, you know, above it or below
it. It's going to say to the low back,
please help out. Give me the mobility
that I lack. So, the low back will do
it, but at an expense, and that's where
you get injured. So you got to address
hip weaknesses. You have to address hip
hip mobility issues. This strikes me as
what they call a mismatch disease or a
mismatch issue. Um when they say
mismatch issue, they mean that there's a
way that we're living our lives these
days that is at odds with how we were
quote unquote supposed to live or how
our ancestors lived. And it's
interesting because I've interviewed
David Rachalan who is an anthropologist
but also Daniel Lieberman. they've both
spent time with the Hadza tribe in West
Africa. And the shocking thing for me is
I was assuming that the reason why we
get back issues and the Hadza tribe
don't really get them. It's because we
spend a lot of time like just sedentary.
However, David Ralin said that they the
Hadza tribe still spend 10 hours a day
in resting postures, but they maintain a
straight J-shaped spine, not the curved
S-shaped spine common in the West. They
squat. Um, they walk, they carry loads a
lot. Um, and they aren't in chairs,
they're doing more active motions. Now,
I'm, you know, I spend a lot of time sat
down, whether it's at a desk doing this
or whether it's in an office. I'm
wondering from your experience if you
thought it would be better to have a
standing desk or if there's No, no. I
think I think standing desks are are are
great and I I hate to say it because it
might actually I might have to hold
myself responsible, but I feel like it
it would be beneficial for me, too. I
think that too much time sitting, right?
There's there's people that call sitting
the new smoking. Like the the
detrimental effects that sitting can
have, prolonged sitting can have on your
body. Especially when you couple it with
the fact that when we do go to sleep, 8
n 10 hours. Like how much time do you
want to spend in a sort of fixed
immobile position in a day? Like you're
you're working all day. There's a big
chunk there, maybe eight hours, nine
hours, 10 hours with intermittent breaks
that you're going to to the bathroom and
getting some water. And then you got
another eight or nine hours at night
that you're doing the same thing. Like
your body wasn't meant to be that
immobile. Like I I think the there's an
actual compression. So when you're when
you're when your joints are subject to
gravity and you're moving through space,
you're actually getting uh a bathing of
those joints of the synovial fluid
that's in these joints like let's say
your knees that you're
essentially mobilizing because you're
compressed and you know again with your
knee you're weight bearing and then
you're off of it. you're weight bearing
your off. It's like squeezing and
bathing that that joint in the synovial
fluid. The outcomes are much better when
we don't allow that to become stagnant.
And when we when we stimulate that
through frequent movement sessions,
being up on your feet at a standing desk
is certainly going to take away some of
the compression and the load that we're
getting from the the chair and probably
discourage some of that really bad
posture that comes from sitting and
doing this. Standing in that, you're
likely going to at least improve your
posture from below. You may not improve
your posture so much from above like we
talked about, but at least from below
you're going to improve that. But I
still think that the inactivity just
standing alone is not solving for the
inactivity. You need to take more
frequent breaks. I think people need to
um get up and walk around just a little
bit. Five minutes every every you know
30 minutes or so would be ideal. But
like if you're going to take a phone
call, go walk while you're on the phone.
Like one thing I do is I have my office
and I have the gym. And as soon as I
know I'm going to be on a call, I just
stand up and I walk around the gym while
I'm on my call just as an excuse to get
up and move. I could easily conduct that
phone call from the chair still, but I'm
doing the rest of my work from the
chair. Anything you can do, you know, I
know they're cliche, but you know, park
a little further when you're at a store,
so you have to walk a little bit more.
But I think it's the frequency of the
breaks that we're not taking, which is
the main the main problem. I think that
even if you added up all the time that
you're active in a day and then the time
that you're not active, it's if it was
the same exact time of an activity, but
I interspersed my activity more
regularly throughout the day, you'd have
less negative side effects than you do
if you're just grouping it. I'm going to
be inactive from this period. I'm going
to be active from this period because
again of that effect of intermittently
bathing and giving these joints a break
and subjecting to that them then to
different stresses than just
compression, compression, compression.
It's one of the reasons why I talk all
the time about the benefit you can get
from just hanging from a bar, right? To
decompress your body, you know, even
just minimally, again, not that much,
you know, one arm hang or so, you know,
two arm hangs a day is enough to give
your your body a bit of a break that
you're not getting right now. And nobody
does that. Nobody nobody hangs from a
bar. What about let's talk about
supplementation. I've got a bunch of
supplements here with me now. And
there's so much said about
supplementation, but if you were to give
me some advice and guide me on what
supplements you think I should be taking
every day frequently versus the ones
that maybe aren't so important, but also
just like the call outs of, you know, I
saw this thing on Twitter going viral
the other day where someone
had screenshotted the top creatines on a
certain website and then they had tested
them in a lab and found that a lot of
them weren't actually creatine in the
doses that they'd said and in the form
that they were selling. Yeah. So, I have
this I now have this skepticism around
the supplements I'm taking. I've got
some supplements here. I've got some
more on the floor. What supplements do
you think we should all be taking and
explain to me why for building muscle?
The two that rank at the very very top
of the list are going to be creatine
monohydrate or creat any form of
creatine. There's different forms of
creatine. We can get into those, but
creatine and a protein powder. And some
people want to argue the necessity of a
protein powder. And I guess if you're
getting enough through your diet, you
you don't have to take it. It's not a
necessity. You're not you're not getting
anything magical from the protein powder
that you are um that you're not getting
through your food. It's just that you're
doing it at a much more economic cost.
If you look at the price of protein
these days, I mean, it's it's certainly
becoming a little bit um unrealistic to
think you're going to meet your daily
goals. And for me, my daily goal is
around at minimum a gram per pound of
body weight and upwards of 1.2 2 grams
per pound of body weight if you're
active. Creatine has become all the rage
recently, it seems. I was looking at
some Google search data and it shows
just how quickly in search volume
creatine is increasing from the early
2020s to 2025. Now it's exploding and
it's been around forever and been and
and the benefits have been known
forever. Right. So that's interesting
because that's all related to the
neurological benefits that creatine is
showing in terms of depression and um
degenerative neurological diseases and
and its improvement it ability to slow
prevent things
like MS and Parkinson's and you know by
basically keeping the brain in a more
favorable uh bioenergetic state meaning
be able to to feed the neurons of the
brain um with the energy that seems to
be lacking in some of these degenerative
diseases.
Also, the other thing that I think has
happened and I did I did a little test
in my office a couple couple of months
back where I asked who in the team took
creatine. Yeah. And every hand that
raised was a man and I asked the women
in my office why they didn't take
creatine. And the overarching sort of
misconception which also my girlfriend
told me about when we were in Cape Town
a couple years ago and I said, "Babe,
you should take creatine. Everyone on my
podcast is talking about it." And she
was like, "No, it's going to make me
it." I think she Yeah. She saw it as
like she saw it as a steroid. Yeah. She
was like, "It's what bodybuilders take."
Well, that's going to change quickly
because I think that you have a lot of
people, highly respected people in the
field that are doing the research as we
speak in these areas that we're talking
about. I urged my wife recently to take
to take it. She is chronically sleepd
deprived because of my boys, you know.
So, she has um you know, she has a
definitely operating on at a higher
stress level. Um it's been shown to
actually improve brain health and
performance in sleepdeprived and in
stressed high stress states. from a
depression standpoint, it's being shown
to be uh very effective even when kind
of paired up with traditional approaches
to treating depression through uh
pharmaceuticals. It's just got a lot of
promise and the good thing is that
there's really no downside, right? They
haven't really identified a downside to
taking it. Um there's a lot of rumors as
to what the downsides are. Actually made
a video recently where I talked to and I
kind of addressed headon what they were.
Jesse of course played our concerned
parent who had all the questions he
asked. But like there is a big confusion
that people have when it comes
to people think it's a steroid and they
think that because the outcomes of
taking creatine are it can increase lean
muscle, it can increase strength. Sure,
because the outcomes are the same as,
let's say, anabolic steroid use doesn't
mean that the mechanism is the same or
the magnitude of what you're going to
see from them is the same or even the
legality of of the of the supplement
itself is the same. We're talking about
two completely different two two
different mechanisms completely and two
different things that the body are going
to react much differently to. When it's
an anabolic steroid, it's going into the
muscle cell, binding to and receptors
that then go into the nucleus of the
cell and change gene expression, right?
To basically convert, as I did in that
video, I said you're taking an iPad and
making it a MacBook, right? You're
you're completely changing what it is.
Whereas with creatine on hydrate, you're
just talking about providing a more
constant flow of energy to those muscle
cells so that they they can continue to
turn over faster and continue to operate
at higher levels of performance. Well,
what happens when that when that occurs?
You're able to generate more work in a
in a workout. By getting more work done,
you're creating more of that overload.
You're also getting a secondary benefit
of pulling water into the muscle cell
with the creatine because osmotically
when you pull water, anything into the
cell, you're going to bring along with
it water to kind of keep the
concentration inside the cell to be the
same. Well, that extra water keeps the
muscle cell hydrated, and that's a great
thing. A more a hydrated muscle cell is
going to likely grow better longer in
the in the long run just like a flower
with water would grow better than one
without. And there's lots of different
types of creatine, right? There's like
gummies now, there's monohydrate,
there's all kinds of creatines. There
was over New Year's again, I was looking
at um different types of creatine. So, I
went to the shop and it sounds crazy,
but I bought like 30 types and I just
started researching it and I realized
that there's like a better form of
creatine. Yeah. Um and there's some
creatines which aren't so good. I ones
that have many things added to them um
etc. Yeah, creatine is pretty simple. I
always present it in sort of two forms
to people because there's a there's one
creatine monohydrate and then there's
one called creatine hydrochloride and
the only difference is what it's bound
to. The creatine monohydrate is bound to
a H2O molecule and the hydrochloride is
bound to a hydrochloric acid molecule.
And so what happens when that's ingested
in your body is that one's more
absorbable than the other. the
hydrochloride is more absorbable than
the other. So, you could take lower
dosages of that. The creatine
monohydrate is usually taken at a higher
dosage. And now there's some new
research coming out that states that I
used to think that it was just five
grams for everybody, but now they're
finding that people that are like
upwards of 200 lb or more, they might
benefit from like 8, nine, 10 grams per
day. So, bigger dosages there. And
people who are at, you know, 120 pounds
or so and maybe some of the females and
female athletes like they might benefit
from even just two to three grams of
creaty hydrochloride is usually in lower
doses anyway. So a comparative dose of
five grams of monohydrate might equal
out to two to three grams of
hydrochloride. What's all this stuff
about loading? Because when I was
younger, my brother was bodybuilding, he
would he would tell me that you had to
load up. Yeah. I you had to have a huge
dosage for a week and then thereafter go
back to a low dosage. It's just so your
body ultimately reaches a capacity for
creatine storage. So if you want to get
there faster, you load. It's five grams
four to five times a day. So a total
dose of 20 to 25 grams in a day. Some
people are going to find that that's a
little bit of an overload for them on
their on their gut. There is a byproduct
of creatine breakdown. Creatin is what
it's called. We get it measured whenever
we get our blood test done. um that can
sometimes pull along with it some extra
water and that can make you feel a
little gut discomfort from that. Again,
at lower dosages, if you're using
hydrochloride, you wouldn't see that
breakdown as much. You wouldn't you
wouldn't get as much of that accumulated
breakdown of creatinin. So, you might
get less of that bloating bloating.
That's the only indication why I would
ever suggest hydrochloride is if you are
some of that 15% of people that have
some sensitivity to that. And a lot of
times getting around the loading phase
and not doing it would bypass some of
that discomfort that you feel, that gut
discomfort that you feel from taking it.
So what happens if you don't load? You
just ultimately get to the same capacity
at a slower pace. So anywhere from 27 to
35 days or so, you're going to reach
that full capacity anyway. If you're
taking it because you want to see
benefits in performance, like power
output and performance, let's say
leading up to an event that's, you know,
a competition in four or five days, then
you might want to load because you have
to kind of get to those full capacities
sooner. But I don't really see a need to
have to load. Um, if again in the long
run, you take away any of those risks,
those gut risks, and then you get to
that ultimate level anyway. And what
about the the proteins I've got here?
Are there any particular proteins that
are better than others? I mean, I like
to say since that's mine, that's that's
better. But the, you know, the the fact
is that anything you can do to
prioritize the quality of the protein.
So, in general, your isolate proteins
are going to be of a higher quality than
your concentrate proteins. Um, they're
still protein, but there's more on a
gram per gram basis. Uh, it's 90% versus
80% um by volume if it's isolate versus
concentrate. you're getting more protein
per per volume, but they're not all as
advertised, are they? Because No. No.
There's I mean, look, I without I don't
ever want to disparrage other brands or,
you know, I I not in the practice of
doing that, but like there are some
garbage quality proteins out there that
are on the shelves of oftentimes like
the biggest retailers. You know, they
they they don't they're they're in it to
make money. They're not in it to provide
high quality. And um again, you're still
getting protein, but by the time your
body absorbs what's in there, it's
netting out to less than what it could
be. How do I spot garbage? Uh I think
the best way to spot garbage would be to
like there's something called amino acid
spiking. You like people will will
actually include a lot of um glycine in
their in their uh proteins like spec
like adding glycine to it because they
can get the label benefit of increasing
protein content. but is actually not a
complete protein. So, you're not getting
the actual quality that you would be
getting from an isolate protein. What
are some foods that you would just
absolutely never let go near your mouth?
Like the real ones where if your kids
asked or you know, you just say there's
no way we're eating that. I really hate
the dyes in foods, the food dyes. I
think that's a really um I'm glad that
that things are being done as we speak
to try to eliminate them from our foods.
I don't know how our industry has gotten
away with it for as long as it has, you
know, in in Europe. They've known about
the dangers of food coloring and food
dyes for a decade or more. And we're
still eating these in our foods all the
time. For what benefit? So, it looks
more attractive on a on a package. Like,
that's What about melatonin?
I've got a little jar of it here that I
found. Um, a lot of people are taking
melatonin now and I've got a friend very
close to me that's encouraging me to
take melatonin. Do you have a view on
it? My view is I I believe it to be
safe. I believe it to be um helpful, you
know, for people that are having a
problem establishing a normal sleep
pattern. Um, we actually do uh uh give
it to our children at night because they
do have they do have issues with sleep.
Um, but honestly, the the thing that
people find to be even more helpful to
establishing that normal sleep pattern
is that consistency in going to bed and
that consistency of waking up. And when
you know you're on the right track, you
generally don't need uh an alarm clock
to wake you up. If you're doing it right
and you're getting enough sleep, you
generally see that your body naturally
wakes up within 5 to 10 minutes of the
same time every morning without an alarm
clock. Have you thought much about how
we're supposed to sleep? I.e. because we
talked about lower back, back pains,
etc. Is there an optimal way to sleep?
Am I meant to sleep on my front, my
back, my side? So again, I think this is
individual, you know, and again, there's
a lot of conditions that can sway
somebody in one direction or another.
In general, I think the position that
has the less the least amount of
negative side effects in terms of how
you feel upon waking is to be in what we
call the corpse corpse position, just
laying on your back with your arms sort
of at your side or crossed over your
your belly like this. If you're able to
tolerate even more kind of up in this
position here with your with your um
arms up just because again that actually
helps a little bit with some of that
internal rotatingness internal rotation
tightness that we get in our shoulders
that you were demonstrating up against
that the wall with that position before.
Not not as big a deal, but you have to
understand that at what other time
really again we just talked about being
static throughout the day, but at least
you're getting up to go to the bathroom.
At least you're getting up to go get a
meal. At least you're getting up to go
take a phone call. When else are you
pretty much statically in the same
position? I don't care if you are on
your side or on your back or on your
other side or on your stomach. You're
pretty static
for 7 8 n hours. There are some effects
that can happen to you while sleeping
that are significant. Like there are
times people wake up and they feel
excruciating amounts of pain. They did
something during the night and they all
I must have done something when I slept,
right? People say that all the time
because they probably did. They probably
did. They either stayed in one position
for too long and weren't conscious of it
or they position themselves over an arm
and it kind of, you know, was in this
really strange position for a long
period of time because they weren't
conscious of
it. But then there's the sort of chronic
effects of being a certain type of
sleeper, like a side sleeper, especially
some that like to sleep in the fetal
position. They they pull their knees up.
You the last thing you need is more hip
flexion. It's like sitting like you're
getting from a chair. You're creating
your own chair in bed, right? You got
another eight, nine hours of being in
that position. Like lengthen them out.
You know, get some get some flexibility
or at least, you know, get some
elongation at that joint and those
muscles. You know, sleeping with a
pillow that is too fluffy can wreak
havoc on your neck. You know, you wake
up the next day. Most most of the back
pain suffers we talked about before. 82%
I believe of people that uh that report
sleep disturbance say it's from back
pain. And what happens? They feel it
mostly. 77% of them feel it upon waking.
It's like they're not feeling it when
they're sleeping, which is even worse
because if they did, they might be able
to modify that. They're feeling it upon
waking. And it goes back again what we
were talking about um earlier. You see,
it all relates. Like this back pain
seems isolated and we're talking about
the thoracic spine, that's back pain.
But now I'm talking about sleeping and
that's back pain. Like all these things
relate to each other. That's why you
have to care about all of it. But being
in that position is with that pillow up
behind your head causes a lot of um
excess flexion of your neck, which can
cause issues with the muscles around
your neck and with the joints in your
neck over time. So, you might like to do
that, but I'm telling you the healthier
position is to sleep with a really flat
pillow. A really flat pillow. Um, I
myself used to wake up every morning
with some degree of neck stiffness. I
switched to a pillow that is pretty much
only about one or two inches high, just
enough to support my head. I never have
any issues with neck pain again. You're
not abnormally propping it up. Not to
mention, if you have any type of sleep
apnea issues or breathing issues at
night, the on the back position with the
head propped up, it's going to be worse
because you're closing down your airway
a little bit more. You know, there are
some cases where again that apnea
patient might want to be on their side.
You know, it's going to be it's going to
be easier for their breathing. But in
most cases on their back and also too,
interestingly, you know, look, our most
people have tight calves, right? Their
ankles are again, we sit all day. We're
not pulling our ankles back towards our
head. We're not maintaining that
mobility towards in our ankle with our
foot moving towards our head. Well, what
happens in a bed? You get in bed, the
the sheets are kind of tight at the
bottom. They're pulling your ankles
straight down like that and your feet
are pointed the whole night, further
tightening those calves because they're
just shortening in that position.
Especially if you trained your calves
that day and your muscles repairing
regenerate at night, you know, you're
basically repairing them in the
shortened position because your toes are
pointed down. I always say if you're
going to get in bed, loosen up the
sheets at the end of the bed so that you
at least get the ability to move your
toes backwards or they're freely moving.
They're not being forced into this
position. So, lots of little tweaks you
can make and some people think they're
not as important. I think they're very
important given how long you stay in
those positions. Never in any other
portion of your day do you spend that
much time in that position. Jeeoff,
what's the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about as it relates to health,
fitness, longevity, and I guess just
more broadly just living a living a good
life?
I think
that you don't want to stress yourself
out thinking of all the things that you
need to do. Um because there's many and
in doing so become paralyzed by
inactivity and say I'm not going to do
anything at all because they can't do
all of it. I think that's one of the
biggest things that I see people do is
they they talk themselves out of it from
the very beginning because they think
that the commitment is going to be too
much more than what they're doing right
now. Too much to ask and they can't do
it. That's that's a mistake. chip away,
dude. Make those We talked about
nutrition again, like make that first
pass. Take away the obvious stuff, the
stuff you know is just not contributing
to a healthier life. Then make another
pass when you're ready from a fitness
standpoint. Get yourself to the gym. Try
to do that first thing we said to take
that first action. Get yourself out the
door. Get a habit of doing that over a
period of a couple months. You want to
you want to start to adopt a more
intense training plan or you want to
start to adopt a more intricate training
split. fine after. Don't worry about it.
Like the most important thing is to get
started and then adopt some of these
little things. You know, I'm really
noticing that my my thoracic spine is
not mobile enough. Like Jeff said, I
mean, you know, hang from the bar, do
that one little activity each day. Those
are the types of things that will pay
big dividends when added up. But don't
be daunted by the thought that all of
them have to be done or you're not going
to be healthy. Any investment that you
make into your body is going to be a
good investment that will pay off. Maybe
not even right now, but as you started
this with the idea of down the road,
like you're realizing now at 32, it's
going to matter at 52, 62, 72. And so by
doing what you're doing now, you're
you're making the right step in the
right direction that can always be
intensified as you go. And by the way,
your ability to intensify and do more is
going to be so much easier then when
you've adopted the habit and you
actually enjoy what you're doing and
rather than making that big departure
from what you're doing now and thinking
you're just going to all of a sudden
start loving all these things, you're
not. And you're likely going to wind up,
you know, making yourself not want to do
it. Jeeoff, thank you for doing what you
do because um, as I said to you before
we started recording, you've been the
go-to resource for me over the years.
And in fact, whenever I've got a
challenge, whether it's like how to
build my triceps or how to avoid an
injury or um other challenges relating
to strength or longevity, all these
kinds of things, I'm always happy when I
find your videos because you're someone
that everybody trusts. You're someone
that presents the information in a
really, really clear visual way of, you
know, you're famous for drawing on your
own body, showing how the muscles sort
of extend and where the muscles are and
the range of motion. But you've helped
me for free for a long long time. Like I
think I think probably a decade. I think
this I spent about 10 years as you you
being my sort of personal trainer. And
because this information is free and
it's on YouTube, you would have helped
literally billions of people. I mean I
was looking at your channel. I think
you've got almost three billion views.
It's might even be more now just on that
one channel alone. But then the clips
and everything else and how that's
inspired other people to become trainers
on YouTube. So on behalf of all of those
people, but also on behalf of me, just
thank you so much for doing what you do.
Um, we have a closing tradition where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest, not knowing who they're
leaving it for. And the question that
has been left for you is, what would you
change about you first and
secondly? Now answer why haven't you?
Okay. What would I change about me and
then why have I not? Wow.
Oh
man, you know, there's there's there's
not much and I'm I'm thinking off the
top of my head here.
So, when I identify something that I
want to change about myself, I usually
do a pretty damn good job of putting in
place steps to to make that happen. And
there are things that are quite personal
about myself. There are things that from
a relationship level, there are things
from a, you know, uh, self-improvement
standpoint, like I always seek to
identify areas that I can improve and I
do make those changes. Um, and I takes I
take it serious and I make steps to do
that. So, of the things that I've wanted
to
do, I think I always wanted to be more
adventurous. I think that I'm a bit of a
of a homebody and I think that I I
I might my wife is a big traveler and I
think that I probably would benefit from
being a little bit more adventurous and
taking some vacations to places that I
would never ordinarily go to if I'm
looking for a travel partner or someone
that could do that. She more than would
be willing to want to do that with with
me. So, I think perhaps I I wished I
would have changed that. Um, I could
certainly use an excuse and say that
that the boys keep us very busy and and
there's a lot of reasons why I haven't,
but it's probably not a real good excuse
because we do find time to go away, but
we seem to go back to the same places
all the time. You got to give me two. It
says first and secondly,
I wish I could be a little bit less
judgmental from time to time and if
anything, just keep it on the side of
opinionated, but be be open to hearing
um the opinions of others more. The
reason why I haven't, I think, is more
of of wanting to be heard. Maybe in a in
a time when I was a kid of not being. I
was a third kid, so I was probably not
heard as much as I often thought I I I w
I wanted to be. So, the opinions come
out first as a reflex, but if I could do
that, I I still wish I could I could get
a little bit better. Thank you. Thank
you.
[Music]
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so
much. Heat. Heat. N.
[Music]